old id = 2579
DeepMind’s Vibrant New Virtual World Trains Flexible AI With Endless Play
2022
https://singularityhub.com/2021/08/01/deepminds-vibrant-new-virtual-world-trains-flexible-ai-with-endless-play

DeepMind’s Vibrant New Virtual World Trains Flexible AI With Endless PlayLast year, DeepMind researchers wrote that future AI developers may spend less time programming algorithms and more time generating rich virtual worlds in which to train them.
In anew paper released this weekon the preprint server arXiv, it would seem they’re taking the latter part of that prediction very seriously.
The paper’s authors said they’ve created an endlessly challenging virtual playground for AI. The world, called XLand, is a vibrant video game managed by an AI overlord and populated by algorithms that must learn the skills to navigate it.
The game-managing AI keeps an eye on what the game-playing algorithms are learning and automatically generates new worlds, games, and tasks to continuously confront them with new experiences.
The team said some veteran algorithms faced 3.4 million unique tasks while playing around 700,000 games in 4,000 XLand worlds. But most notably, they developed a general skillset not related to any one game, but useful in all of them.
These skills included experimentation, simple tool use, and cooperation with other players. General skills in hand, the algorithms performed well when confronted with new games, including more complex ones, such as capture the flag, hide and seek, and tag.
This, the authors say, is a step towards solving a major challenge in deep learning. Most algorithms trained to accomplish a specific task—like, in DeepMind’s case, to win at games such as Go or Starcraft—are savants. They’re superhuman at the one task they know and useless at the rest. They can defeat world champions at Go or chess, but have to be retrained from scratch to do anything else.
By presenting deep reinforcement learning algorithms with an open-ended, always-shifting world to learn from, DeepMind says their algorithms are beginning to demonstrate “zero-shot” learning at new never-before-seen tasks. That is, they don’t need retraining to perform novel tasks at a decent level—sight-unseen.
This is a step towards more generally capable algorithms that can interact, navigate, and solve problems in the also-endlessly-novel real world.
But XLand isn’t the AI community’s first inkling of generalization of late.
OpenAI’s GPT-3 can generate uncannywritten passages—its primary purpose—but it can do other things too, like simple arithmetic and programming. And it can be fine-tuned with just a few examples. (OpenAI says GPT-3 demonstrates “few-shot” learning.)And last year, DeepMind itselfdeveloped an algorithmthat wrote a key piece of its own code called the value function, which guides its actions by projecting rewards. Surprisingly, after being trained in very simple “toy worlds,” the algorithm went on to play 14 Atari games it had never encountered at a superhuman level, performing, at times, on par with human-designed AI.
Notably, the more “toy worlds” the algorithm trained on, the better it could generalize. At the time, the team speculated that with enough well-designed training worlds, the approach might yield a general-purpose reinforcement learning algorithm.
XLand’s open-ended learning moves us further down that road. How far the road goes, however, is an open and hotly debated question.
Here, the algorithms are playing rather simple games in a relatively simple world (albeit cleverly tuned to keep things fresh). It isn’t clear how well the algorithms would do on more complex games, let alone in the world at large. But if XLand is a proof-of-concept, their findings may suggest increasingly sophisticated worlds will give birth to increasingly sophisticated algorithms.
Indeed, researchers at DeepMind recently put a stake in the ground, arguing (philosophically, at least) that reinforcement learning—the method behind the organization’s most spectacular successes—is all we need to get to artificial general intelligence. OpenAI and others, meanwhile, are going after unsupervised deep learning at scale for advanced natural language processing and image generation.
Not everyone agrees. Some believe deep learning will hit a wall and have to pair up with other approaches, likesymbolic AI. But three of the field’s pioneers—Geoffrey Hinton, Yoshua Bengio, and Yann LeCun—recentlyco-wrote a paperarguing the opposite. They acknowledge deep learning’s shortcomings, including its lack of flexibility and inefficiency, but believeit will overcome its challengeswithout resorting to other disciplines.
Philosophical arguments aside, narrow AI is already having a big impact.
DeepMind showed as much recently with itsAlphaFold algorithm, which predicts the shapes of proteins. The organization justreleased the predicted shapes of 350,000 proteins, including nearly every protein in the human body. They said another 100 million are on the way.
To put that in perspective, scientists have worked out the structure of some 180,000 proteins over decades. DeepMind’s protein drop nearly doubled the count in one fell swoop. The newly minted protein library hasn’t been rigorously confirmed by scientists, but it will be a valuable tool for them. Instead of starting from a blank slate, they’ll have a template (perhaps much more) to work from.
Whatever becomes of the quest for artificial general intelligence, it seems there’s still plenty of room to run for its more vocational forerunners.
Image Credit:DeepMindLatestThis Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through May 21)Volvo and DHL Are Partnering on Hub-to-Hub Autonomous TruckingHow a Volcanic Bombardment in Ancient Australia Led to the World’s Greatest Climate CatastropheRELATEDNanomagnetic Computing Could Drastically Cut AI’s Energy UseA Hybrid AI Just Beat Eight World Champions at Bridge—and Explained How It Did ItNVIDIA’s Tiny New AI Transforms Photos Into Full 3D Scenes in Mere SecondsHow the Extinction of Ice Age Mammals May Have Forced Us to Invent CivilizationGet the latest news from Singularity Hub!Singularity University, Singularity Hub, Singularity Summit, SU Labs, Singularity Labs, Exponential Medicine, Exponential Finance and all associated logos and design elements are trademarks and/or service marks of Singularity Education Group.
© 2022 Singularity Education Group. All Rights Reserved.
Singularity University is not a degree granting institution.
