old id = 328
This Spooky, Bizarre Haunted House Was Generated by an AI
2022
https://singularityhub.com/2021/10/29/this-spooky-bizarre-haunted-house-was-generated-by-an-ai

This Spooky, Bizarre Haunted House Was Generated by an AIAI is slowly getting more creative, and as it does it’s raising questions about the nature of creativity itself, who owns works ofart made by computers, and whether conscious machines willmake arthumans can understand. In the spooky spirit of Halloween, one engineer used an AI to produce a very specific, seasonal kind of “art”: a haunted house.
It’s not a brick-and-mortar house you can walk through, unfortunately; like so many things these days, it’s virtual, and was created by research scientist and writerJanelle Shane. Shane runs a machine learning humor blog calledAI Weirdnesswhere she writes about the “sometimes hilarious, sometimes unsettling ways that machine learning algorithms get things wrong.”For the virtual haunted house, Shane usedCLIP, a neural network built by OpenAI, andVQGAN, a neural network architecture that combines convolutional neural networks (which are typically used for images) with transformers (which are typically used for language).
CLIP (short for Contrastive Language–Image Pre-training) learns visual concepts from natural language supervision, using images and their descriptions to rate how well a given image matches a phrase. The algorithm useszero-shot learning, a training methodology that decreases reliance on labeled data and enables the model to eventually recognize objects or images it hasn’t seen before.
The phrase Shane focused on for this experiment was “haunted Victorian house,” starting with a photo of a regular Victorian house then letting the AI use its feedback to modify the image with details it associated with the word “haunted.”The results are somewhat ghoulish, though also perplexing. In the first iteration, the home’s wood has turned to stone, the windows are covered in something that could be cobwebs, the cloudy sky has a dramatic tilt to it, and there appears to be fire on the house’s lower level.
Shane then upped the ante and instructed the model to create an “extremely haunted” Victorian house. The second iteration looks a little more haunted, but also a little less like a house in general, partly because there appears to be a piece of night sky under the house’s roof near its center.
Shane then tried taking the word “haunted” out of the instructions, and things just got more bizarre from there. She wrote in herblog postabout the project, “Apparently CLIP has learned that if you want to make things less haunted, add flowers, street lights, and display counters full of snacks.”“All the AI’s changes tend to make the house make less sense,” Shanesaid. “That’s because it’s easier for it to look at tiny details like mist than the big picture like how a house fits together. In a lot of what AI does, it’s working on the level of surface details rather than deeper meaning.”Shane’s description matches up with whereAIstands as a field. Despite impressive progress in fields likeprotein folding,RNA structure,natural language processing, andmore, AI has not yet approached “general intelligence” and is still very much in the “narrow” domain. Researcher Melanie Mitchell argues thatcommon fallaciesin the field, like using human language to describe machine intelligence, are hampering its advancement; computers don’t really “learn” or “understand” in the way humans do, and adjusting the language we used to describe AI systems could help do away with some of the misunderstandings around their capabilities.
Shane’s haunted house is a clear example of this lack of understanding, and a playful reminder that we should move cautiously in allowing machines to make decisions with real-world impact.
Banner Image Credit:Janelle Shane, AI WeirdnessFollow Vanessa:LatestThis Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through May 21)Volvo and DHL Are Partnering on Hub-to-Hub Autonomous TruckingHow a Volcanic Bombardment in Ancient Australia Led to the World’s Greatest Climate CatastropheRELATEDNanomagnetic Computing Could Drastically Cut AI’s Energy UseA Hybrid AI Just Beat Eight World Champions at Bridge—and Explained How It Did ItNVIDIA’s Tiny New AI Transforms Photos Into Full 3D Scenes in Mere SecondsHow the Extinction of Ice Age Mammals May Have Forced Us to Invent CivilizationGet the latest news from Singularity Hub!Singularity University, Singularity Hub, Singularity Summit, SU Labs, Singularity Labs, Exponential Medicine, Exponential Finance and all associated logos and design elements are trademarks and/or service marks of Singularity Education Group.
© 2022 Singularity Education Group. All Rights Reserved.
Singularity University is not a degree granting institution.
