old id = 2593
Microsoft's Massive New Language AI Is Triple the Size of OpenAI’s GPT-3
2022
https://singularityhub.com/2021/10/13/microsofts-massive-new-language-ai-is-triple-the-size-of-openais-gpt-3

Microsoft’s Massive New Language AI Is Triple the Size of OpenAI’s GPT-3Just under a year and a half ago OpenAI announced completion ofGPT-3, its natural language processing algorithm that was, at the time, the largest and most complex model of its type. This week, Microsoft and Nvidiaintroduceda new model they’re calling “the world’s largest and most powerful generative language model.” The Megatron-Turing Natural Language Generation model (MT-NLG) is more than triple the size of GPT-3 at 530 billion parameters.
GPT-3’s 175 billion parameters was already a lot; its predecessor,GPT-2, had a mere 1.5 billion parameters, and Microsoft’sTuring Natural Language Generationmodel, released in February 2020, had 17 billion.
A parameter is an attribute a machine learning model defines based on its training data, and tuning more of them requires upping the amount of data the model is trained on. It’s essentially learning to predict how likely it is that a given word will be preceded or followed by another word, and how much that likelihood changes based on other words in the sentence.
As you can imagine, getting to 530 billion parameters required quite a lot of input data and just as much computing power. The algorithm was trained using an Nvidia supercomputer made up of 560 servers, each holding eight 80-gigabyte GPUs. That’s 4,480 GPUs total, and anestimated costof over $85 million.
For training data, Megatron-Turing’s creators usedThe Pile, a dataset put together by open-source language model research group Eleuther AI. Comprised of everything from PubMed to Wikipedia to Github, the dataset totals 825GB, broken down into 22 smaller datasets. Microsoft and Nvidia curated the dataset, selecting subsets they found to be “of the highest relative quality.” They added data fromCommon Crawl, a non-profit that scans the open web every month and downloads content from billions of HTML pages then makes it available in a special format for large-scale data mining. GPT-3 was also trained using Common Crawl data.
Microsoft’sblog poston Megatron-Turing says the algorithm is skilled at tasks like completion prediction, reading comprehension, commonsense reasoning, natural language inferences, and word sense disambiguation. But stay tuned—there will likely be more skills added to that list once the model starts being widely utilized.
GPT-3 turned out to have capabilities beyond what its creators anticipated, like writing code, doing math, translating between languages, and autocompleting images (oh, and writing ashort filmwith a twist ending). This led some tospeculatethat GPT-3 might be the gateway toartificial general intelligence. But the algorithm’s variety of talents, while unexpected, still fell within the language domain (including programming languages), so that’s a bit of a stretch.
However, given the tricks GPT-3 had up its sleeve based on its 175 billion parameters, it’s intriguing to wonder what the Megatron-Turing model may surprise us with at 530 billion. The algorithm likely won’t be commercially available for some time, so it’ll be a while before we find out.
The new model’s creators, though, are highly optimistic. “We look forward to how MT-NLG will shape tomorrow’s products and motivate the community to push the boundaries of natural language processing even further,” they wrote in theblog post. “The journey is long and far from complete, but we are excited by what is possible and what lies ahead.”Image Credit:Kranich17fromPixabayFollow Vanessa:LatestThis Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through May 21)Volvo and DHL Are Partnering on Hub-to-Hub Autonomous TruckingHow a Volcanic Bombardment in Ancient Australia Led to the World’s Greatest Climate CatastropheRELATEDNanomagnetic Computing Could Drastically Cut AI’s Energy UseA Hybrid AI Just Beat Eight World Champions at Bridge—and Explained How It Did ItNVIDIA’s Tiny New AI Transforms Photos Into Full 3D Scenes in Mere SecondsHow the Extinction of Ice Age Mammals May Have Forced Us to Invent CivilizationGet the latest news from Singularity Hub!Singularity University, Singularity Hub, Singularity Summit, SU Labs, Singularity Labs, Exponential Medicine, Exponential Finance and all associated logos and design elements are trademarks and/or service marks of Singularity Education Group.
© 2022 Singularity Education Group. All Rights Reserved.
Singularity University is not a degree granting institution.
