old id = 3017
Drone Startup to Fly Pallets Without Pilots - IEEE Spectrum
2022
https://spectrum.ieee.org/cargo-drone

TopicsSectionsMoreFor IEEE MembersFor IEEE MembersIEEE SpectrumFollow IEEE SpectrumSupport IEEE SpectrumIEEE websites place cookies on your device to give you the best user experience. By using our websites, you agree to the placement of these cookies. To learn more, read our Privacy Policy.
Enjoy more free content and benefits by creating an accountSaving articles to read later requires an IEEE Spectrum accountThe Institute content is only available for membersDownloading full PDF issues is exclusive for IEEE MembersAccess toSpectrum's Digital Edition is exclusive for IEEE MembersFollowing topics is a feature exclusive for IEEE MembersAdding your response to an article requires an IEEE Spectrum accountCreate an account to access more content and features onIEEE Spectrum, including the ability to save articles to read later, download Spectrum Collections, and participate in conversations with readers and editors. For more exclusive content and features, considerJoining IEEE.
Join the world’s largest professional organization devoted to engineering and applied sciences and get access to all of Spectrum’s articles, archives, PDF downloads, and other benefits.
Learn more →Access Thousands of Articles — Completely FreeCreate an account and get exclusive content and features:Save articles, download collections,andtalk to tech insiders— all free! For full access and benefits,join IEEEas a paying member.
Drone Startup to Fly Pallets Without PilotsDronamics will test a radical new vision of long-range cargo transport in EuropeA Black Swan drone, from Dronamics, stands at the ready.
Deliveringthings by dronebegan as a stuntin 2012, when a model airplane dropped a burrito by parachute to a hungry customer waiting below. The concept then graduated, first to a proof-of-principle venture inIcelandusing multicopters, then to a well-funded Amazon project in the United Kingdom. But these and similar attempts to solve the last-mile problem—the mile leading to the customer—have largely been disappointing. Amazon recentlyscaled backits drone-based delivery project in the U.K.
In 2022,Dronamics, a company based in London and Sofia, Bulgaria, will test-fly a drone in Europe that will carry far more than a mere burrito and over far longer distances. It addresses the less sexy but equally important middle-distance problem—the route that connects factories to warehouses. The point is to take a slice of business that’s now handled by regular air freight and by trucks—above all, the quick delivery of critical parts. If this service had been available a year or two ago, it might not have prevented the logistics logjam that now plagues the world, but it would have cleared away some of the more problematic bottlenecks.
Dronamics will run trials with its partners, includingDHLandHellmann Worldwide Logistics, in the hope of eventually fielding thousands of drones, each carrying as much as 350 kilograms of cargo up to 2,500 kilometers. The European Union has facilitated this sort of experimentation by instituting a single certification policy for drone aircraft. Once its aircraft are certified, Dronamics must get a route approved through one of the E.U.’s member countries; that done, it should be fairly easy to get other member countries to agree as well.
In October, Dronamicsannouncedthat it would use Malta as its base, with a view to connecting first to Italy and later to other Mediterranean countries.
One thing Dronamics doesn’t do is full-scale autonomy: Its planes do notdetect and avoidobstacles. Instead, each flight is programmed in advance, in a purely deterministic way. Flights often take place in controlled airspace and always between drone ports that the company controls. Someone on the ground monitors the flight from afar, and if something unexpected arises, that person can redirect the plane.
“We operate like a proper airline, but we can intervene,” saysSvilen Rangelov, the cofounder and CEO of Dronamics. “We’re looking for underserved airports, using time slots where there is no passenger traffic. In the United States there are 17,000 airports, but only about 400 are commercially used. The rest don’t have regular service at all.”Unlike themulticopter burrito drones of years past, or even Amazon’s prototypes, these machines fly on fixed wings and are powered by internal combustion engines, the better to carry big loads long distances and to operate at off-the-grid airfields. “Anything less than 200 miles [about 320 kilometers] is not appropriate because, given the time to get to the airport, fly, and then pick up, you may as well truck it,” Rangelov says.
The company’s drone is called Black Swan, a phrase often used to describe important but unpredictable events. “That was precisely the reasoning” behind the name, Rangelov says, explaining what makes this drone so unique and rare. "We knew [the drone] had to be cheaper to produce and to operate than any existing models.”The drone likely will not be carrying one pallet of the same things but multiple packages for many customers.
Because this vehicle is intended to transport cargo with no people on board, Dronamics could design the interior to fit cargo pallets. “It’s exactly the right cargo size for this business,” Rangelov says. “It likely will not be carrying one pallet of the same things but multiple packages for many customers.” And Dronamics claims it can carry cargo for half of what today’s air freighters charge.
Hellmann Worldwide Logistics sees a lot of potential for using Dronamics in Africa and other places with limited infrastructure. For now, though, the company is focused on the dense population, manageable distances, and supportive governmental institutions of Europe.
“Especially between north and south Europe—from Germany and Hungary, where there’s a lot of automotive business,” saysJan Kleine-Lasthues, Hellmann’s chief operating officer for air freight. There are also supply lines going into Italy that service the cruise ships on the Mediterranean Sea, he says, and fresh fish would be ideal cargo. Indeed, Dronamics is working on a temperature-controlled container.
What effect would massive fleets of such drones have had on today’s supply-chain problems? “It could help,” he says. “If the container isn’t arriving with production material, we could use drones to keep production alive. But it’s not replacing the big flow—it’s just a more flexible, more agile mode of transport.”Before cargo drones darken the skies, though, Hellmann wants to see how the rollout goes.
“First of all, we want to try it,” Kleine-Lasthues says. “One use case is replacing commercial air freight—for example, Frankfurt to Barcelona by drone; also, there’s a use case replacing vans. If it is working, I think it can be quickly ramped up. The question is how fast can Dronamics add capacity to the market.”This article appears in the January 2022 print issue as “Flying Pallets Without Pilots.”Philip E. Rossis a senior editor at IEEE Spectrum. His interests include transportation, energy storage, AI, and the economic aspects of technology. He has a master's degree in international affairs from Columbia University and another, in journalism, from the University of Michigan.
Practical Power Beaming Gets RealVideo Friday: Drone in a CageRemembering 1982 IEEE President Robert LarsonAcer Goes Big on Glasses-Free, 3D Monitors—Look Out, VRIs this what’s needed to bring augmented reality to the home office?Matthew S. Smithwrites IEEE Spectrum's Gizmo column and is a freelance consumer-tech journalist. An avid gamer, he is a former staff editor at Digital Trends and is particularly fond of wearables, e-bikes, all things smartphone, and CES, which he has attended every year since 2009.
Content creators are a key target for Acer’s glasses-free 3D.
Acer, the world’s fifth largest PC brand, wants to take the growing AR/VR market by the horns with its SpatialLabs glasses-free stereoscopic 3D displays.
First teased in 2021 in a variant of Acer’s ConceptD 7 laptop, the technology expands this summer in a pair of portable monitors, the SpatialLabs View and View Pro, and select Acer Predator gaming laptops. The launch is paired with artificial-intelligence-powered software for converting existing 2D content into stereoscopic 3D.
“We see a convergence of virtual and reality,” Jane Hsu,head of business Development for SpatialLabs, said in an interview. “It’s a different form for users to start interacting with a virtual world.” Glasses-free stereoscopic 3D isn’t new.
Evolutionary, not revolutionaryThe technology has powered several niche products and prototypes,such as Sony’s Spatial Reality Display, but its most famous debut was Nintendo’s 3DS portable game console.
The 3DS filtered two images through a display layer called a parallax barrier. This barrier controlled the angle an image reached the user’s eyes to create the 3D effect. Because angle was important, the 3DS used cameras that detected the user’s eyes and adjusted the image to compensate for viewing angle.
“The PC in 2022 is encountering a lot of problems.”—Jerry Kao, AcerAcer’s technology is similar. It also displays two images which are filtered through an “optical layer” and has cameras to track and compensate for the user’s viewing angle.
So, what’s different this time?“The fundamental difference is that the computing power is way different, and resolution is way different,” said Hsu. “The Nintendo, that was 800 by 240. In a sense, the technology is the same, but over time it has improved for a crystal-clear, high-resolution experience.”Resolution is important to this form of glasses-free 3D. Because it renders two images to create the 3D effect, the resolution of the display is cut in half on the horizontal axis when 3D is on. The 3DS cut resolution to 400 by 240 when 3D was on and blurry visuals werea common complaint among critics.
Acer’s SpatialLabs laptops and displays are a big improvement. Each provides native 4K (3,840 by 2,160 resolution) in 2D. That’s 43 times the pixel count of Nintendo’s 3DS. Turning 3D on shaves resolution to 1,920 by 2,160, which, while lower, is still sharper than that of a 27-inch 4K monitor.
Hsu says advancements in AI compute are also key. Partners like Nvidia and Intel can now accelerate AI in hardware, a feature that wasn’t common a half decade ago.
Acer has harnessed this for SpatialLabs GO, a software utility that can convert full-screen content from 2D to stereoscopic 3D. This should make SpatialLabs useful with a wider range of content. It can also help creators generate content for use in stereoscopic 3D by importing and converting existing assets.
A new angle on augmented realityAcer was a lead partner in Microsoft’s push for mixed-reality headsets. They were a flop, and their failure taught Acer hard lessons about how people approach AR/VR hardware in the real world.
“Acer spent a lot bringing VR headsets to market, but...it was not very successful,”Acer Co-COO Jerry Kao said in an interview. “There were limitations. It’s not comfortable, or it’s expensive, and you need space around you. So, we wanted to address this.”SpatialLabs is a complementary alternative. Creators can use Spatial Labs to achieve a 3D effect in their home office without pushing aside furniture. The Acer View Pro, meant for commercial use, may have a future in retail displays, a use that headsets can't address.
The View Pro display is built for use in kiosks and retail displays.
AcerMost of the SpatialLabs product line, including the ConceptD 7 laptop and View displays, lean toward creative professionals using programs like Maya and Blender to create 3D content. Acer says its software suite has “out-of-the-box support for all major file formats.” It recently added support for Datasmith, a plug-in used to import assets toEpic’s Unreal Engine.
But the technology is also coming to Predator gaming laptops for glasses-free stereoscopic 3D in select titles likeForza Horizon 5andThe Witcher 3: Wild Hunt. Gaming seems a natural fit given its history in Nintendo’s handheld, and Hsu thinks it will help attract mainstream attention.
“When the Turn 10 team [developer of the Forza Horizon series] saw what we had done withForza Horizon 5, they were like, ‘Wow, this is so great!’ ” said Hsu. “They said, ‘You know what? I think I can build the scene with even more depth.’ And this is just the beginning.”Does glasses-free 3D really stand a chance?SpatialLabs brings gains in resolution and performance, but it’s far from a surefire hit. Acer is the only PC maker currently pursuing the hardware. Going it alone won’t be easy.
“While the tech seems quite appealing, it will likely remain a niche product that’ll be used in rare instances by designers or developers rather than the average consumer,”Jitesh Ubrani, research manager at IDC, said in an email. He thinks Acer could find it difficult to deliver on price and availability, “both of which are tough to do for such a fringe technology.”I asked Hsu how Acer will solve these issues. “In a way he’s right, it is difficult. We’re building this ourselves,” said Hsu. “But also, the hardware is more mature.”Kao chimed in to say SpatialLabs will stand out in what might be weak year for home computers. “The PC in 2022 is encountering a lot of problems,” Kao said. He sees that as a motivation, not a barrier, for novel technology on the PC.
“Intel, Google, Microsoft, and a lot of people, they have technology,” said Kao. “But they don’t know how to leverage that technology in the product and deliver the experience to specific people. That is what Acer is good at.”DARPA Wants a Better, Badder Caspian Sea MonsterLiberty Lifter X-plane will leverage ground effectArguably, the primary job of any military organization is moving enormous amounts of stuff from one place to another as quickly and efficiently as possible. Some of that stuff is weaponry, but the vast majority are things that support that weaponry—fuel, spare parts, personnel, and so on. At the moment, the U.S. military has two options when it comes to transporting large amounts of payload. Option one is boats (a sealift), which are efficient, but also slow and require ports. Option two is planes (an airlift), which are faster by a couple of orders of magnitude, but also expensive and require runways.
To solve this, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) wants to combine traditional sealift and airlift with theLiberty Lifter program, which aims to “design, build, and flight test an affordable, innovative, and disruptive seaplane” that “enables efficient theater-range transport of large payloads at speeds far exceeding existing sea lift platforms.”DARPADARPA is asking for a design like this to take advantage of ground effect, which occurs when an aircraft’s wing deflects air downward and proximity to the ground generates a cushioning effect due to the compression of air between the bottom of the wing and the ground. This boosts lift and lowers drag to yield a substantial overall improvement in efficiency. Ground effect works on both water and land, but you can take advantage of it for only so long on land before your aircraft runs into something. Which is why oceans are the ideal place for these aircraft—or ships, depending on your perspective.
During the late 1980s, the Soviets (and later the Russians) leveraged ground effect in the design of a handful of awesomely bizarre ships and aircraft. There’s theVVA-14, which was also an airplane, along with the vehicle shown in DARPA’s video above, theLun-class ekranoplan, which operated until the late 1990s. The video clip really does not do this thing justice, so here’s a better picture, taken a couple of years ago:InstagramTheLun(only one was ever made) had a wingspan of 44 meters and was powered by eight turbojet engines. It flew about 4 meters above the water at speeds of up to 550 kilometers per hour, and could transport almost 100,000 kilograms of cargo for 2,000 km. It was based on an earlier, even larger prototype (the largest aircraft in the world at the time) that the CIA spotted in satellite images in 1967 and which seems to have seriously freaked them out. It was nicknamed the Caspian Sea Monster, and it wasn’t until the 1980s that the West understood what it was and how it worked.
In the mid 1990s, DARPA itself took a serious look at a stupendously large ground-effect vehicle of its own, theAerocon Dash 1.6 wingship. The concept image below is of a 4.5-million-kg vehicle, 175 meters long with a 100-meter wingspan, powered by 20 (!) jet engines:WikipediaWith a range of almost 20,000 km at over 700 km/h, the wingship could have carried 3,000 passengers or 1.4 million kg of cargo. By 1994, though, DARPA had decided that the potential billion-dollar project to build a wingship like this was too risky, and canceled the whole thing.
Less than 10 years later, Boeing’s Phantom Works started exploring an enormous ground-effect aircraft, thePelican Ultra Large Transport Aircraft. The Pelican would have been even larger than the Aerocon wingship, with a wingspan of 152 meters and a payload of 1.2 million kg—that’s about 178 shipping containers’ worth. Unlike the wingship, the Pelican would take advantage of ground effect to boost efficiency only in transit above water, but would otherwise use runways like a normal aircraft and be able to reach flight altitudes of 7,500 meters. Operating as a traditional aircraft and with an optimal payload, the Pelican would have a range of about 12,000 km. In ground effect, however, the range would have increased to 18,500 km, illustrating the appeal of designs like these. But Boeing dropped the project in 2005 to focus on lower cost, less risky options.
We’d be remiss if we didn’t at least briefly mention two other massive aircraft: theH-4 Hercules, the cargo seaplane built by Hughes Aircraft Co. in the 1940s, and theStratolaunch carrier aircraft, which features a twin-fuselage configuration that DARPA seems to be favoring in its concept video for some reason.
From the sound of DARPA’s announcement, they’re looking for something a bit more like the Pelican than the Aerocon Dash or theLun. DARPA wants the Liberty Lifter to be able to sustain flight out of ground effect if necessary, although it’s expected to spend most of its time over water for efficiency. It won’t use runways on land at all, though, and should be able to stay out on the water for 4 to 6 weeks at a time, operating even in rough seas—a significant challenge for ground-effect aircraft.
DARPA is looking for an operational range of 7,500 km, with a maximum payload of at least 90,000 kg, including the ability to launch and recover amphibious vehicles. The hardest thing DARPA is asking for could be that, unlike most other X-planes, the Liberty Lifter should incorporate a “low cost design and construction philosophy” inspired by the mass-produced Liberty ships of World War II.
With US $15 million to be awarded to up to two Liberty Lifter concepts, DARPA is hoping that at least one of those concepts will pass a system-level critical design review in 2025. If everything goes well after that, the first flight of a full-scale prototype vehicle could happen as early as 2027.
Modeling Microfluidic Organ-on-a-Chip DevicesRegister for this webinar to enhance your modeling and design processes for microfluidic organ-on-a-chip devices using COMSOL MultiphysicsIf you want to enhance your modeling and design processes for microfluidic organ-on-a-chip devices,tune into this webinar.
You will learn methods for simulating the performance and behavior of microfluidic organ-on-a-chip devices and microphysiological systems in COMSOL Multiphysics. Additionally, you will see how to couple multiple physical effects in your model, including chemical transport, particle tracing, and fluid–structure interaction. You will also learn how to distill simulation output to find key design parameters and obtain a high-level description of system performance and behavior.
There will also be a live demonstration of how to set up a model of a microfluidic lung-on-a-chip device with two-way coupled fluid–structure interaction. The webinar will conclude with a Q&A session.
Register now for this free webinar!Trending StoriesPractical Power Beaming Gets RealDARPA Wants a Better, Badder Caspian Sea MonsterSimple, Cheap, and Portable: A Filter-Free Desalination System for a Thirsty WorldVideo Friday: Drone in a CageAcer Goes Big on Glasses-Free, 3D Monitors—Look Out, VRAndrew Ng: Unbiggen AIHydrogen Helps Make Topological Insulators PracticalMaple Seeds Inspire Efficient Spinning Microdrone
