old id = 393
The World Food Program’s Coronavirus Fight—and How You Can Help
2022
https://singularityhub.com/2020/05/14/the-world-food-programs-coronavirus-fight-and-how-you-can-help

The World Food Program’s Coronavirus Fight—and How You Can HelpThe coronavirus outbreak has thrown the world into turmoil. On top of the infections and deaths it’s caused, there have been significant knock-on effects on financial markets, supply chains, businesses, and livelihoods.
One of the most crucial systems we must safeguard as the crisis continues to play out is the food system. Food supply is already threatened fromvarious angles, and allowing these threats to play out would be disastrous.
The UN’sWorld Food Program(WFP) offers food assistance to 87 million people in more than 80 countries. To make sure these programs are disrupted as little as possible, the WFP is looking to implement creative, tech-driven solutions to food supply chain, production, and delivery systems—andinnovative startups and individualscan help.
Last weekDarlene Damm, Singularity University’s Chair of Global Grand Challenges, spoke withBernhard Kowatsch, head of the WFP’s Innovation Accelerator, andCarmen Burbano, director of the WFP’s School Feeding Division, abouttheactions andinnovationsneeded to make sure the pandemicdoesn’t cause abreakdown in food supply, particularlyforthemost vulnerable.
“Because of Covid-19, the number of people at risk of dying from famine has almost doubled,” Kowatsch said. “We expect that 465 million people are at risk in 2020. This is really an acute crisis that we have todeal with properly.” And, he added, we haven’t even seen the most severe impacts of Covid-19 in developing countries yet.
What’s WorkingTech used to solve a lot of problems that aren’t really problems (CES 2020, though very cool, wasreplete with examples). But it’s also chipping away at global challenges that truly need solving—like hunger and food supply.
“There are a lot of solutions that are only possible right now because of the spread of technology,” Kowatsch said. “And compared to just a few years ago, the cost of many technologies has come down dramatically.” These are some of the innovations that have helped the WFP feed people before and during Covid-19.
Hunger Map LIVEis a data and analysis tool that tracks food security, healthcare access, and markets in vulnerable countries in real time. An early warning system is in place for areas that slide into high risk, and the WFP is also using data from this tool to keep tabs on how the pandemic is impacting security in vulnerable places.
Building Blocksis a blockchain solution that transfers cash directly to refugees. In its first week of use it served over 10,000 Syrian refugees in Jordan, and has now been expanded to over 100,000 refugees. “People can go to a shop and buy food on blockchain, and the system is being adapted to Covid-19; instead of using a fingerprint to pay, they can use a contactless QR card,” Kowatsch said.
Instead of getting money from an ATM then using that money to go buy food, a tool calledFood ATMis cutting out the middle man. Piloted in 2019, it’s currently being deployed in Sudan and elsewhere. “It does just what it sounds like it does,” Kowatsch said. That is, locally-procured food commodities are monitored and dispensed on demand by machines. The machines are filled and maintained by locals the WFP trains.
School closures because of the coronavirus pandemic mean kids are missing out on education—but in developing nations and even in the US, they’re also missing out on meals. Millions of children, Burbano explained, rely on schools to provide them with a healthy meal, and in many cases it’s the only one they get in a day. In the 30 countries most at risk of hunger, WFP partnered with UNICEF to launch a program that repackages food into take-home rations; these are either delivered to students’ homes by teachers, picked up at schools by parents, or turned into cash vouchers that are given to families.
Finally, apps likeShare the Meal(in which anyone can provide a meal to someone in need by donating 50 cents through the app) andFree Rice(a word game where for every answer players get right, the WFP gets a donation of 20 grains of rice) have been a huge success, with over 2 million people donating more than 63 million meals and 202 billion rice grains donated.
What’s NeededThese tools are making a difference. But to really build a high-performing system that can end hunger, Burbano said, advances inautomationand data collection are going to be crucial.
For starters, WFP administrators need to be able to monitor their programs remotely in a way that’s transparent and accountable, with data being the key component. “We need to be able to merge different data sets so that we can understand, at the same time, things like how much these programs are costing, who is eating what, and where there problems we need to focus on,” Burbano said. In Burundi, for example, schools are testing a web-based system called School Connect. It digitizes data entry related to school food stock inventory, student attendance, and meal consumption, which helps administrators improve supply chain planning and kids’ nutrition.
Trading a one-size-fits-all approach for more custom solutions will be crucial too. Some families truly need free meals, while others can afford to pay a portion, and still others don’t need assistance at all—but currently, there’s not enough visibility at a household level to be able to adjust the programs accordingly.
When asked about additional issues they most need help with right now, here’s what Burbano and Kowatsch listed.
Facilitating the purchase of food from local farmers in at-risk locations: for example, how do you send cash to smallholder farmers that are selling very small quantities of food to schools?Managing a cash ecosystem without too much bureaucracy and making it intuitive and frictionlessEnsuring that food being transferred between people locally is safe to eatDigitally monitoring children’s attendance at school and supply chain stockFor all the innovators, philanthropists, global-challenge-focused startups, and caring humans out there: we’ve got our work cut out for us. “We’re all in this together” is tired but true; let’s act like it and put our money and our minds where they’re needed most.
Image Credit:WFP / Brook duBoisFollow Vanessa:LatestThis Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through May 21)Volvo and DHL Are Partnering on Hub-to-Hub Autonomous TruckingHow a Volcanic Bombardment in Ancient Australia Led to the World’s Greatest Climate CatastropheRELATEDDemocracy Is Ailing. Here’s How We Can Start Reviving ItThese ‘Chicken-Free’ Egg Whites Use a Protein Recipe From Real ChickensThis ‘Cow-Free Milk’ Has Real Dairy Protein, but No Lactose or CholesterolRepublish this article for free in any language, online or in print, under theCreative Commonslicense CC BY-ND 4.0. Learn more aboutrepublishing.
RepublishYou are free to republish this article in any language, online or in print, under theCreative Commonslicense CC BY-ND 4.0. By republishing this content you agree to comply with the Singularity HubRepublishing Guidelines.
When republishing, please do not edit the contents of the article, ensure that you attribute the author and acknowledge that the article was originally published on Singularity Hub. Pleasecontact uswith any questions.
To republish this article, copy the HTML code below and paste it to your CMS. Please do not remove the pixel counter.
Press Ctrl+C to copy and Ctrl+V to paste.
How the Extinction of Ice Age Mammals May Have Forced Us to Invent CivilizationGet the latest news from Singularity Hub!Singularity University, Singularity Hub, Singularity Summit, SU Labs, Singularity Labs, Exponential Medicine, Exponential Finance and all associated logos and design elements are trademarks and/or service marks of Singularity Education Group.
© 2022 Singularity Education Group. All Rights Reserved.
Singularity University is not a degree granting institution.
