old id = 3271
Stories From Around the Web: Virtual Reality Is the Ultimate Empathy Machine
2022
https://singularityhub.com/2015/08/07/virtual-reality-is-the-ultimate-empathy-machine

Stories From Around the Web: Virtual Reality Is the Ultimate Empathy MachineFrom the earliest plays and novels, artists have created mediated experiences for their audiences to entertain, teach and expand perspectives. The best of these have catapulted audiences into magical worlds and deep into the lives of the characters inhabiting those worlds. Now, virtual reality could eclipse them all with its ability to generate powerful emotions of empathy and send us to previously unimagined landscapes and experiences.
Below are a handful of articles from around the web examining this potential for creating empathy, from the neuroscience explaining what makes empathy in VR possible, to applications in filmmaking, journalism and civic engagement.
How Virtual Reality Can Create the Ultimate Empathy MachineChris Milk | TED“It’s not a video game peripheral. It connects humans to other humans in a profound way that I’ve never seen before in any other form of media. And it can change people’s perception of each other. And that’s how I think virtual reality has the potential to actually change the world. So, it’s a machine, but through this machine we become more compassionate, we become more empathetic, and we become more connected. And ultimately, we become more human.”Inside the Empathy Machine: VR, Neuroscience, Race and JournalismJoel Beeson | Media Shift“Neuroscientists have been exploring the use of VR in terms of empathy and embodiment in light of new understandings of what is called themirror neuron system. These brain cells trigger when a primate carries out an action but also activate when it watches another primate doing the same act, making a virtual simulation in the brain — an essential skill for social interaction and learning. Some neuroscientists believe this process gives virtual reality its power to create empathy and to build connections across divides of race, gender, age and class.”The Limits of Virtual Reality: Debugging The Empathy MachineAinsley Sutherland | MIT Open Documentary Lab“At Stanford’s Virtual Human Interaction Lab, a key research goal is “empathy at scale.” Excitement about the discovery of so-called“mirror neurons”lends a sense of possible increases in scientific rigor, and experiments in body visualization and “perspective-taking” have been met with positive results in medical studies. But can the immersive perspective provided by virtual reality actually provoke increases in empathy?”How The NY Times Is Sparking the VR Journalism RevolutionAngela Watercutter | Wired“A lot of the questions about the importance of VR for journalism go back to empathy—the current buzzword in VR filmmaking. Taking a page from Roger Ebert’s assertion that a movie is an “empathy machine,” people excited about VR’s storytelling potential like to point out that nothing will make a person more empathetic to a protagonist than virtually living in their world. So when that protagonist is actually a resident of a war-torn country, say, or protester in the streets, that potential for empathy is quite sizable.”Could Virtual Reality Improve Civic Engagement in Policy Making?Eddie Copeland | Democratic Audit UK“Imagine if instead of the petition, the tweet, or the forum, we could use technology to simulate environments or decisions, to gamify the process so that the public could accurately model the outcomes that would result from one policy decision or another. In its efforts to crowdsource information, imagine if government could seek out the most skilled or knowledgeable individuals and organizations on a particular area by seeing who advanced most progressively through a virtual reality rules-based decision game.”We’d love to hear from you: Tweet to us@singularityhubor to me@svm118with questions, suggestions, comments and ideas on the series. To get updates on the latest posts from Singularity Hub, sign uphere.
Image Credit:ShutterstockFollow Sveta:LatestThis Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through May 21)Volvo and DHL Are Partnering on Hub-to-Hub Autonomous TruckingHow a Volcanic Bombardment in Ancient Australia Led to the World’s Greatest Climate CatastropheRELATEDThis Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through May 21)Democracy Is Ailing. Here’s How We Can Start Reviving ItThis Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through May 14)Republish this article for free in any language, online or in print, under theCreative Commonslicense CC BY-ND 4.0. Learn more aboutrepublishing.
RepublishYou are free to republish this article in any language, online or in print, under theCreative Commonslicense CC BY-ND 4.0. By republishing this content you agree to comply with the Singularity HubRepublishing Guidelines.
When republishing, please do not edit the contents of the article, ensure that you attribute the author and acknowledge that the article was originally published on Singularity Hub. Pleasecontact uswith any questions.
To republish this article, copy the HTML code below and paste it to your CMS. Please do not remove the pixel counter.
Press Ctrl+C to copy and Ctrl+V to paste.
How the Extinction of Ice Age Mammals May Have Forced Us to Invent CivilizationGet the latest news from Singularity Hub!Singularity University, Singularity Hub, Singularity Summit, SU Labs, Singularity Labs, Exponential Medicine, Exponential Finance and all associated logos and design elements are trademarks and/or service marks of Singularity Education Group.
© 2022 Singularity Education Group. All Rights Reserved.
Singularity University is not a degree granting institution.
