old id = 3318
Thought Leadership Publications & Business Insights | BCG
2022
https://www.bcgperspectives.com/content/articles/lean-manufacturing-innovation-industries-economies-leading-robotics-revolution

Log inFeatured Insights and Perspectives from BCGLatest InsightsOUR PARTNERSHIPS / LIVE FROM DAVOSBCG at DavosBCG at DavosWe at BCG are honored to send our delegation—led by our CEO, Christoph Schweizer—to join public and private leaders at the World Economic Forum’s Annual Meeting in May 2022 in Davos to address global societal and business challenges.
FOOD SYSTEMS AND FOOD SECURITY / ARTICLEThe War in Ukraine and the Rush to Feed the WorldThe War in Ukraine and the Rush to Feed the WorldIn the wake of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, our global food systems are struggling to feed those most at risk.
CLIMATE AND ENVIRONMENT / ARTICLEEducation as a Catalyst for Climate ProgressEducation as a Catalyst for Climate ProgressEducation is a powerful means of spurring behavioral change and collective action, cultivating green skills, ensuring a just transition to a sustainable economy, and building communities' adaptive capacity.
SOCIAL IMPACT AND SUSTAINABILITY / REPORTHow Private Equity Can Create Value Through PurposeHow Private Equity Can Create Value Through PurposeThe industry holds clear advantages for making the businesses it invests in more environmentally and socially sustainable. Interviews with leading players point to five priorities.
ARTIFICAL INTELLIGENCE / ARTICLEIgnoring AI Is Risky Business for Insurance CEOsIgnoring AI Is Risky Business for Insurance CEOsThe technology is breaking down the industry's historically high barriers to entry. Building AI-ready organizations has to be at the top of the executive agenda.
The 2022 Value Creators RankingsThe 2022 Value Creators Rankings: The End of Tech Dominance?Reversals in TSR performance since the start of the year have hit innovation-driven industry sectors such as technology, medical technology, financial infrastructure, and green energy especially hard.
BCG Value Creators Report: The CollectionBCG has published annual rankings of the top value creators—and perspectives on value creation trends—since 1998. Explore the full series, including the latest rankings.
The First Steps Toward the Finance Function of the FutureA CFO must set unique near-term ambitions that are bold enough to motivate employees to achieve their full potential.
BCG Investor Perspectives SeriesAs we navigate an uncertain world, what do investors expect from the US economy, the US stock market, and business leaders?BCG at DavosBCG-WEF Project: The Net-Zero ChallengeThe race to net-zero emissions will forever change the way many companies do business. The immediacy, pace, and extent of change are still widely underestimated. Early movers can seize significant advantage. This report shows how.
The Five Digital Building Blocks of a Corporate Sustainability AgendaAchieving ESG goals and building sustainability as a competitive advantage requires integrating technology and data from the beginning.
Why AI Needs a Social LicenseIf business wants to use AI at scale, adhering to the technical guidelines for responsible AI development isn’t enough. It must obtain society’s explicit approval to deploy the technology.
The Hidden Cultural Benefits of AIA new study by GAMMA, BHI, and MIT-SMR suggests a counterintuitive key to morale and organizational effectiveness: robots.
Featured CollectionsBCG Executive PerspectivesBCG Executive Perspectives offer insights on global topics that matter most to leaders in the public and private sectors.
Explore these topics and read the latest thinking from BCG's experts.
The So What: A Business Strategy PodcastFrom COVID-19 to social inequity, this business strategy podcast series looks around business and social trends and ideas that will disrupt the future.
Climate and EnvironmentThe BCG Center for Climate and Sustainability helps clients develop climate and sustainability solutions to secure sustainable competitive advantage.
Artificial IntelligenceScaling artificial intelligence can create a massive competitive advantage. Learn how our AI-driven initiatives have helped clients extract value.
What AI Reveals About Trust in the World’s Largest CompaniesBCG’s AI-based Trust Index enables companies to break down stakeholder perceptions of their trustworthiness. Analyses based on the Index have yielded valuable insights about what builds, sustains, or destroys trust.
Putting Micromobility at the Center of Urban MobilityE-bikes, e-mopeds, and e-scooters can go from fad to fixture—and win over commuters—if cities consider ways to bundle these modes with public transit.
Nudging Consumers Toward SustainabilityCompanies that empower consumers and create a societal surplus can reward shareholders, build sustainability markets, and protect the planet. It’s a win-win-win.
Featured Insights: BCG’s most inspiring thought leadership on issues shaping the future of business and society.
SubscribedFollow UsBoston Consulting Group is an Equal Opportunity Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, age, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity / expression, national origin, protected veteran status, or any other characteristic protected under federal, state or local law, where applicable, and those with criminal histories will be considered in a manner consistent with applicable state and local laws.
SUBSCRIBELog in
