old id = 428
The Singularity Executive Program
2022
https://su.org/executive-program

let's talkSubmit your contact details below and a representative will get in contact soon to discuss your goals and how best to achieve them with Singularity.
let's talkthe singularity executive programleadership development designed to help you think like a futuristdiscover the impact ofNFTslongevitythe blockchainalgorithmic biasthe metaverseDAOsempathyWeb 3.0entrepreneurshipbiohackingroboticsexponential techCRISPRartificial intelligencequantum computinghuman potentialthe singularityextended realityXR / VR / ARexponential techNFTslongevitythe blockchainalgorithmic biasthe metaverseDAOsempathyWeb 3.0entrepreneurshipbiohackingroboticsexponential techCRISPRartificial intelligencequantum computinghuman potentialthe singularityextended realityXR / VR / ARexponential tech+copyright lawthe future of citiesdiversitythe workplacereal estateleadershipbusinessfinancechangefinancethe environmentyour companysocietyyouagriculturesocietygovernmentmanufacturingsupply chainsyour companycopyright lawthe future of citiesdiversitythe workplacereal estateleadershipbusinessfinancechangefinancethe environmentyour companysocietyyouagriculturesocietygovernmentmanufacturingsupply chainsyour companydownload the brochure and sample agendastep into the futureGrasp the power of exponential technologies and their implications on your business, community and the planetshift your mindsetLearn to see opportunities in moments of uncertainty and start thinking about the future like a futuristunderstand your impactAdopt an ethical perspective and learn how leaders can deploy technology to create a better, balanced tomorrow for allfind your peopleJoin a highly curated cohort of leaders who think about the future through a diverse global lenscreate your roadmapGo from ‘thinking’ to ‘doing' with Singularity’s unique innovation frameworks and strategiespick your program...or keep scrolling for more informationwhere leaders learn to thrive during uncertain timeswhere leaders learn to thrive during uncertain timesinnovation strategyimpact investingdeep techalgorithmic biasfuture of workmetaverselongevity & bio-techrobotics & aiblockchain for goodinnovation strategyaugmented humansdeep techalgorithmic biasDAOsmetaverselongevity & bio-techrobotics & aiblockchain for goodinnovation strategyimpact investingdeep techalgorithmic biasDAOsmetaverselongevity & bio-techrobotics & aiblockchain for goodinnovation strategyimpact investingdeep techalgorithmic biasDAOsmetaverselongevity & bio-techrobotics & aiblockchain for goodinnovation strategyquantum computing3-D printingalgorithmic biasDAOsmetaversefuture of financerobotics & aibio-hackinginnovation strategyimpact investingdeep techfuture of citiesDAOsmetaverselongevity & bio-techrobotics & aiblockchain for goodinnovation strategyimpact investingdeep techalgorithmic biasDAOsmetaverselongevity & bio-techrobotics & aiblockchain for goodinnovation strategyimpact investingdeep techalgorithmic biasDAOsmetaverselongevity & bio-techrobotics & aiblockchain for goodthe future is better with a guideSince 2007, Singularity has worked with leading experts from diverse backgrounds including academia, entrepreneurship, government organizations, and venture capitalism. This ensures exposure to a wide range of perspectives from the most forward thinking experts.
divya chanderray kurzweildr. melanie riebackalix rübsaamanne connellyshuo chenja-nae duanekian goharcharlene lihod lipsontom chipeterdiamandissam snabesaaron frankdarlene dammanita schjøll bredejohn hagelmark jacksoncorey ponderbryce goodman10,000 future-focused leaders and countingWe all come from different industries, from different countries, from different backgrounds. But there is a unifying element and that is our own self selection to spend our time improving the way we think in order to solve world challenges and using technology for good. And that's the unifying element that brings this diverse group of people together.
The best way to describe what happened to me after a week of hearing some of the brightest people in tech talk about the future is that they dramatically changed my perspective. Come to find out, I had a very narrow lens through which I viewed the world; they replaced it with a wide angle lens that goes beyond our planet and looks far into the future.
The Executive Program was a truly mind-expanding experience which should help prepare me for the extraordinary changes to come.
future ethical technology advisorfuture chief experience officerfuture minister of the metaverseare you ready to lead tomorrow's world?We seek diversity of industry, background and geography to curate the richest experience for attendees.
With a maximum of 80 seats per cohort, applicants should fit the following profile:A look into your executive program experienceprogram detailsprice$16,000 USD ($15,000 for Singularity Members)program themeThe New, Emerging LeaderlocationAmeswell Hotel, Mountain View, CAwith field trips to SRI International and Computer History Museumtotal seats70upcoming cohort application deadlineSOLD OUTlocationAmeswell Hotel, Mountain View, CAtotal seats80upcoming cohort application deadlineSeptember 16, 2022locationAmeswell Hotel, Mountain View, CAtotal seats100upcoming cohort application deadlineOctober 21, 2022locationAmeswell Hotel, Mountain View, CAtotal seats100upcoming cohort application deadlineOctober 28, 2022interested in attending a future cohort?Submit your application now to be first in line.
apply for your cohortWe review applications on a rolling basis. The earlier you apply, the better.
confirm your acceptanceIf accepted, you will have two weeks to confirm participation and pay your tuition.
cohort onboardingGain access to your cohort’s digital platform two weeks before the program begins and get to know your fellow leaders.
day one (arrival day)This is arrival day for participants. Right from the start you’ll see what it means to live in an exponential world. You’ll be introduced to the foundational concepts at Singularity: exponential technology and positive impact.
day twoWhen people learn about exponential technology, they typically feel excited, but also overwhelmed and afraid. Day two is designed to help you embrace the uncertainty and discover how it’s not as unimaginable as it first appears.
day threeAfter learning how the world will continue to change, the next step is to think about the implications of those changes.
day fourOnce you’ve learned about the changes and considered the implications, it’s time to explore your role as a business leader more deeply. On day four, you’ll get serious about how you as an individual and a business leader will become a changemaker and bring about global positive transformation.
day fiveAt the end of the week, it’s time to act. Day five will embolden you with the tools you need to walk away with concrete next steps. The abstract will be made real, and you’ll dive deep into the practical and tangible realities of the world you envision.
exploration(for up to 12 months)Our year-long virtual programming will help you stay up to date and continue to expand on the ideas and frameworks presented during your program.
Have more questions?We applaud curious minds at Singularity and know you may have more questions. Check out our FAQ resource or reach out and talk to a human (robots available upon request.)Subscribe NowStart your journey with regular news and updates about the future of technology and impact.
followexperienceexplorejoinaboutengagecontact
