old id = 3405
These Pizza Robots Assemble Perfect Pies in Minutes
2022
https://singularityhub.com/2017/07/27/these-pizza-robots-assemble-perfect-pies-in-minutes

These Pizza Robots Assemble Perfect Pies in MinutesOh pizza, how I love thee. Let me count the ways. Your golden, flaky crust. Your salty-sweet tomato sauce. Your gooey, stretchy cheese. Your predictive algorithms and efficiently automated production line…Wait, what?Sounds like a mix-up of two very different proclamations of love, right? But in fact, pizza and robots have come together at Silicon Valley startupZume Pizza.
Zume’s founders Alex Garden and Julia Collins plan to scale up automation of their pizza production line to the point where humans aren’t involved in making the pizzas at all—but the cofounders claim this doesn’t mean their employees will be out of a job.
As it stands, robots already dominate the kitchen at Zume. To get from raw ingredients to fragrant deliciousness, the process goes like so:Algorithms set up to monitor ingredients know when it’s time to order more pepperoni or scale back on the mushrooms, which means no tedious counting of inventory or filling out purchase orders.
Besides a process that’s efficient and quick, Zume’s pizza also boasts “half the calories per slice, roughly half the cholesterol and half the fat of any of the national leading chains,”according to Garden.
Ingredients are sourced straight from providers, and key ingredients like tomato sauce and sausage are made in-house (by humans).
The boxes the pizzas are delivered in are special, too—made of a compostable sugar cane-based material, they’re designed to keep steam from making the crust soggy.
Equally important is Zume’s delivery system. The company’s first delivery truck was custom-designed with 56 ovens inside, each connected to GPS. Why, you ask? Zume trucks receive orders and bake pizzas while they’re en route to consumers. It’s a decentralized delivery system that allows for quick repositioning of operations to meet shifting demand.
The flip side, though, is that the center of operations—the pizza-making robots—can only make so many pizzas in a given slice of time, so even if their delivery is more efficient, rising demand must be met by faster production times.
That’s why seemingly minor improvements—like the dough-flattening robot that makes pizza creation36 seconds faster—are actually pretty significant.
So why all the fuss when, at the end of the day, it’s still just (delicious, gooey) pizza?Zume’s system is a preview of what food preparation and delivery will look like in the not-so-distant future. If you think about the individual tasks required for large-scale food production, they’re mostly repetitive, monotonous, and easily replicable by a machine.
Burgers get flipped. Lettuce gets chopped. Potatoes get fried. And so on and so forth.
Having machines do these tasks instead of people has multiple benefits: there’s no human error, no risk of injury from sharp knives or hot grills, and the labor cost savings can be invested in other areas of the business or passed on to consumers.
The obvious question that keeps cropping up as more and more tasks get automated, though, is what will be left for people to do?It’s a question we don’t quite have the answer to yet, though optimists predict theend of meaningless jobswill free people to do work that’s more fulfilling and creative, and catalyze the development of new types of jobs that don’t even exist yet (60 years ago there was no such thing as a ‘software engineer’ or a ‘graphic designer’, for example).
Zume cofounder Gardenis among these optimists.
“We’re a high-growth company,” he said. “We have people who’ve moved from a role in the kitchen to other roles—to customer support or to finance. You come in and prove that you can work the Zume way, and we make a lifetime commitment to you in return.”Though it’s uncertain what workers will do once displaced by Zume’s technology and other food automation systems like it, the pizza industry itself isn’t going anywhere. Whether it’s made by a robot or a person, delivered by GPS or by hand—we’ll eat it, and with gusto.
Stock media provided by cookelma / Pond5Follow Vanessa:LatestThis Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through May 21)Volvo and DHL Are Partnering on Hub-to-Hub Autonomous TruckingHow a Volcanic Bombardment in Ancient Australia Led to the World’s Greatest Climate CatastropheRELATEDVolvo and DHL Are Partnering on Hub-to-Hub Autonomous TruckingA 590-Foot-Tall Dam in China Will Be Built Entirely by RobotsDemocracy Is Ailing. Here’s How We Can Start Reviving ItRepublish this article for free in any language, online or in print, under theCreative Commonslicense CC BY-ND 4.0. Learn more aboutrepublishing.
RepublishYou are free to republish this article in any language, online or in print, under theCreative Commonslicense CC BY-ND 4.0. By republishing this content you agree to comply with the Singularity HubRepublishing Guidelines.
When republishing, please do not edit the contents of the article, ensure that you attribute the author and acknowledge that the article was originally published on Singularity Hub. Pleasecontact uswith any questions.
To republish this article, copy the HTML code below and paste it to your CMS. Please do not remove the pixel counter.
Press Ctrl+C to copy and Ctrl+V to paste.
How the Extinction of Ice Age Mammals May Have Forced Us to Invent CivilizationGet the latest news from Singularity Hub!Singularity University, Singularity Hub, Singularity Summit, SU Labs, Singularity Labs, Exponential Medicine, Exponential Finance and all associated logos and design elements are trademarks and/or service marks of Singularity Education Group.
© 2022 Singularity Education Group. All Rights Reserved.
Singularity University is not a degree granting institution.
