old id = 446
The 7 Best Mirrorless Cameras (2022): Full Frame, APS-C, and More | WIRED
2022
https://www.wired.com/gallery/best-mirrorless-cameras

To revisit this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
To revisit this article, select My Account, thenView saved storiesScott GilbertsonThe Best Mirrorless CamerasYou know what'sthe least important part of taking a great photo? Gear. The vision you have and the work you put into realizing it are far more critical.
That's not to say gear doesn't matter, just that it's best used in service of something larger, not obsessed over. That's why this guide doesn't get too deep into the weeds of megapixel counts, sensor sizes, and pixel peeping. All these cameras are capable of producing amazing images; which one is right for you depends more on your needs than the size of the sensor.
But choosing the right one can be confusing. I've spent the past year testing dozens in all kinds of shooting scenarios to come up with what I think are the best choices for different types of photographers.
Be sure to check out our many other buying guides, like theBest Compact Cameras,Best Camera Bags, andBest Action Cameras.
Updated January 2022: We've added the Sony A7 IV, which is now our top pick for most people, and updated pricing and availability throughout.
Special offer for Gear readers: Get a1-year subscription to WIRED for $5 ($25 off). This includes unlimited access to WIRED.com and our print magazine (if you'd like). Subscriptions help fund the work we do every day.
If you buy something using links in our stories, we may earn a commission. This helps support our journalism.
Learn more. Please also considersubscribing to WIREDFull Frame or APS-C?The internet has an obsession with sensors, megapixels, and zooming in on images to find their flaws. Here's the thing: If sharpness is what you want, shoot the largest format you can. But know that great photographs don't need to be razor-sharp from edge to edge. Few of them are.
That said, most of the cameras here have “full-frame sensors” (except the Fujifilm models, which use the APS-C sensors). There is nothing magical about this size; it just happens to be the same size as 35-mm film. This means that any lens made for a film camera can (probably) be adapted to work with the camera and produce the same field of view.
There are much smaller sensors—micro four-thirds, for example—that are capable of producing very sharp images. Future versions of this guide may include some micro four-thirds cameras, but for now, to keep things simple, I've limited testing to APS-C and larger sensors.
Best for Most PeopleSony's new A7 IV (9/10, WIRED Recommends) is a 33-megapixel full-frame camera capable of incredibly sharp images, with excellent dynamic range and the best autofocus system on the market. It's compact and lightweight enough to carry all day without back strain, and the grip is comfortable. The five-axis image stabilization means you can hand-hold it in lower light, and the wide range of 4K video options make it the best all-around photo and stills combo on this page. There are better stills cameras (see the Sony A7RIV below) and better video cameras, but nothing else combines the two quite as well.
What I don't like about it, or any other Sony, is the labyrinthine menu system. Luckily there are enough customizable buttons that it's not too difficult to set things up so you never need to dive into the menus.
Specs: 33-megapixel full-frame sensor, 10 frames per second (fps), 7K oversampled 4K/30fps video, SD and Express cardsAnother option:If you don't need the new autofocus features, the A7III remains a solid choice, and it's frequently onsale for under $2,000.
Best on a BudgetFujifilm's X-T4 is one of the best values in the camera market. Fujifilm uses APS-C sensors, which are smaller than the full-frame sensors in the rest of the cameras in this guide, but the images are every bit as sharp. The X-T4 has in-body image stabilization and significant autofocus improvements compared to its predecessor. There's also a clear division between photo and video mode, so you can easily switch back and forth. The XT-4 also offers a fully articulating rear touchscreen, something you won't find in either of the Sony cameras.
The camera body's design is reminiscent of film cameras, and perhaps the best thing about it is how seldom you need to use digital controls. ISO, shutter speed, exposure compensation, and shooting modes are all accessible via physical dials. Finally, Fujifilm's excellent line of lenses is surprisingly affordable relative to some of the others on the list, making this one of the least expensive systems to invest in. My only real gripe is the grip; it's on the small side for a body of this size.
Specs: 26-megapixel XTrans APS-C sensor, 15 fps with full AF, 4K/60fps video, dual SD cardsMegapixel MadnessSony's A7RIV uses a 61-megapixel full-frame sensor. From a pure resolution standpoint, it is unmatched (unless you opt for medium-format cameras). If that's not enough, there's a 16-shot high-resolution mode that can create 240-MP images (so long as your subject is static, e.g., a landscape). The dynamic range is outstanding, and the ability to recover detail in the shadows is something you'll only believe once you do it yourself. I was able to pull up shadows in my RAW editor by as much as five stops with no more noise than if I had shot at the corresponding ISO in the first place.
While the still images the A7RIV produces are frankly remarkable, its video chops are not of the same caliber. That's not to say its specs are bad, but there are more capable video cameras if that's your focus. Other downsides are its price, and its RAW files are huge (around 125 megabytes per image). If you buy one, pick up some extra hard drives too.
Specs: 61-megapixel full-frame sensor, 10 fps with full AF (12 bit RAM, 6 fps for 14-bit RAW), 4K/30fps video, dual SD cardsBest for Nikon FansThe Nikon Z6 II is Nikon's answer to the Sony A7III, and it is a good answer for dedicated Nikon shooters. The 24-megapixel full-frame sensor has excellent dynamic range, and the phase-detect autofocus system is one of the best I've used. Video quality is also excellent, with 10-bit 4:2:2 N-Log output possible over HDMI. The Nikon Z6 II is also the most comfortable camera to hold on this list. Although this will depend somewhat on the size of your hands, the grip is larger and more generously spaced than on the Sony or Fujifilm cameras.
The Z-series lens system is also intriguing for its wider base mount, which allows more light to the corners of the sensors. The benefits of this can be seen in the incredibly fast 58-mm f/0.95 lens (manual focus), and also the surprisingly small 50-mm f/1.2. If you've got a lot of legacy Nikon glass you want to keep using, there's an F-to-Z-mount adapter available for $250. The only thing I don't like is the strange dual card system that supports two different types of storage cards.
Specs: 24-megapixel full-frame sensor, 12 fps with full AF, 4K/30fps video, XQD/CFexpress (Type B), and SD card slotOther options:The original Z6 is still a great camera that you can getfor a little less. Its processing power is not as speedy, and it only has one XQD slot. Alternatively, if you want more resolution, there's the Z7 II, which is very nearly identical to the Z6 II, except it has a 42-megapixel sensor. It'smore expensive at $3,000.
Best for Canon FansThe Canon EOS R is a mirrorless option for people who loved their DSLRs. It's a hefty beast, with a solid feel that reminds me of what I used to love about film cameras. Even the on-off switch is made of metal. The sensor is typically Canon, which is to say sharp, with good contrast and the characteristic Canon color rendering (it's slightly warmer in tone than some of the others here). The phase-detect autofocus is fast and accurate.
One thing I really like is when you change lenses, there's a cover that swings out to protect the sensor from dust (the exception is if you have an adapter and you remove the lens, but not the adapter). Every camera in this list would benefit from adopting this feature. The R-Mount lens system uses a very wide base diameter, like the Nikon system, and achieves similar results—there are fast R lenses around. The better news for those already invested in Canon glass is that there's a $99 adapter that will let you affix just about any older Canon glass to the R.
Specs: 30-megapixel full-frame sensor, 8 fps with autofocus, 4K/30fps video, dual SD card slotsBest for VideoPanasonic's S5 is a compact full-frame mirrorless with a very sharp 24-megapixel sensor. The S5 mostly holds its own against the rest of these full-frame cameras in still image quality, but what really sets it apart is the extra video features you won't find elsewhere—support for V-Log recording, anamorphic 4K support, and uncropped 4K at 30 frames per second top the list. The result is a camera that's perfect for hybrid video and stills shooters.
The S5 uses the L-mount lens system, an effort to do for full-frame what Panasonic did for micro four-thirds: create a unified lens mount standard. Leica is the driving force behind the L-mount, but Panasonic and Sigma also have plenty of glass in L-mount. That means there's no shortage of lenses for the S5. The biggest shortcoming is the autofocus. Like the bigger S1, there's no phase detection, and the camera relies on a contrast-based detection system, which is slower and less accurate. If you're comparing it to the GH5 for video, it's nearly identical, save the lack of a full-size HDMI port.
Specs: 24-megapixel full-frame sensor (no AA filter), 5 fps with autofocus, 4K/30fps video, dual SD card slotsBest for TravelI have not tested this brand-new Fujifilm camera, but it has the same sensor as the XT-4 above, and the body is very similar tothe X-E3. So I feel safe saying that the extremely compact X-E4 is going to be very nice to travel with, whenever we all get back to traveling again.
It has 90 percent of what the XT-4 offers, which makes it easier to say what you don't get. There's no in-body image stabilization, the viewfinder is smaller and not as high-resolution, the LCD tilts but isn't fully articulated, and the body isn't weather-sealed. This last is a sore point. Frankly, there's no excuse for not adding full weather-sealing in a camera that so obviously calls to be in your hand at all times. Still, if you can get by without it, this is a very capable yet compact camera. Read ourBest Compact Camerasguide for other options. Stock at retailers has been fluctuating quite a bit. If it's sold out, check back later.
Specs: 26-megapixel XTrans APS-C sensor, 8 fps with autofocus, 4K/30fps video, single SD card slotBuying AdviceThere is no such thing as the perfect camera. Each has its own limitations, and a part of the magic of photography is learning how to get around them. What you want to find is the camera best suited to the type of photos you want to take.
If you want to shoot wildlife, you need good in-body stabilization. If you're a street photographer shooting from the hip, stabilization isn't as important, but an extending viewfinder becomes paramount. If you're a landscape photographer who always uses a tripod, you probably don't need either of those things, but you might need a sensor capable of sharp, wall-size prints.
Once you've figured the camera best suited to your needs, buy a lens to go with it and start shooting every day. Read the manual for your camera and learn what it can and cannot do, and then use it over and over and over until it is an effortless extension of your mind. Once you have the comfort level, the gear fades to the background, where it belongs, and you can focus on making the images you've always dreamed of creating.
Oh, and hey, you may want to pick up a camera bag, sling, cube, or other accessories for your new system. Don't fear, we havejust the guide to help.
WIRED COUPONSExtra 20% off sitewide - Dyson promo code 2022GoPro Hot Deal: $150 off the new HERO10 Black BonesSamsung coupon - 45% off select items + free shippingExtra $100 off XPS & Inspiron laptops, desktops & 2 in 1s with Dell coupon codeDeal of the Day: 1-day flash sale for 20% off electronics & appliancesAT&T Internet promo code - $50 reward with AT&T Fiber orderMore From WIREDContact© 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of ourUser AgreementandPrivacy Policy and Cookie StatementandYour California Privacy Rights.
Wiredmay earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
Ad Choices
