old id = 3517
UN World Food Programme (WFP)
2022
https://www.wfp.org

ABOUTTRANSPARENCY AND ACCOUNTABILITYPARTNERSHIPSABOUT HUNGERSAVING LIVESCHANGING LIVESSUPPORTING GOVERNMENTSINNOVATION AND DIGITAL TRANSFORMATIONWHERE WE WORKCountriesSee all countriesEmergenciesINDIVIDUAL SUPPORTERSCOMPANIES AND START-UPSPARTNERSMEDIA CENTRERESOURCES & DATAWar in Ukraine: WFP chief renews call to open Black Sea ports as global food security is at stakeUkraine key statsUnprecedented needs: the factsunprecedented needsHow cash reels people back from uncertainty in DRCStory| 17 May 20222022WFP responds to a global hunger catastrophePage| 13 May 2022Unprecedented needsDelivering against the odds in AfghanistanStory| 9 May 2022Climate actionMeet the Mozambican acting before climate disasters strikeStory| 20 May 2022War in Ukraine‘We left everything and ran for our lives’Story| 12 May 20222020 Nobel Peace Prize LaureateWe are the world’s largest humanitarian organization, saving lives in emergencies and using food assistance to build a pathway to peace, stability and prosperity for people recovering from conflict, disasters and the impact of climate change.
WFP in numbers115.5million peoplein 84 countriesreceived assistance from WFP in 2020 through food or cash distributions in emergencies, nutrition support programmes and participation in activities to build resilience to climate and other shocks.
5.6Ktrucks100 aircraft and 30 shipsare on the go on any given day, enabling WFP to prevent people from falling into famine and deliver vital food and other assistance to those who need it the most.
17million childrenacross the worldreceived nutritious meals from WFP, which allowed them to concentrate on their learning and develop their full potential.
WFP Annual Performance Report 2020Find out more about WFP’s work.
Read reportHunger Map LiveGet up-to-date information on food security in 90 countries.
See the mapSaving livesin emergenciesWFP is one of the first agencies on the ground in global emergencies caused by conflict, climate shocks, pandemics and other disasters. We provide life-saving support to people at risk of going hungry, and we coordinate the response of the global humanitarian community to large-scale emergencies.
WFP is continuously scanning the world for potential risks to vulnerable populations. When an emergency strikes, we use the information at hand to organize our response and launch our operation, rapidly deploying skilled emergency personnel and working with hundreds of partners, including sister UN agencies and local NGOs.
We organize WFP and partners’ supplies and staff to be shipped via the UN Humanitarian Air Service and network of UN Humanitarian Response Depots. We also call upon the Logistics, Telecommunications and Food Security clusters to ensure the humanitarian community’s needs are fully covered.
We work with government agencies, local authorities, emergency partners and, above all, the affected communities themselves to identify places and people in most need, using innovative methods including geospatial technology.
We provide communities with food, cash or a combination of both, depending on the emergency context and people’s urgent needs. We provide food, ideally buying it locally, or opt for cash assistance where local markets are functioning.
An emergency may last a few months or several years. When the situation has stabilized, WFP either withdraws staff and other resources, or implements longer-term programmes that protect and improve people’s livelihoods. We also review our response together with impartial assessors to inform and improve our future work.
Changing livesworldwideFood assistance: cash-based and in-kindWFP distributes food in areas where it is scarce. In places where food is available but unaffordable, we give vulnerable people cash or vouchers to buy nutritious ingredients. These cash transfers give people more choice, protect them from financial exploitation, and support the local economy.
Resilience buildingWFP’s long experience in humanitarian and development contexts has positioned the organization well to support resilience building in order to improve food security and nutrition. WFP helps the most vulnerable people strengthen their capacities to absorb, adapt and transform in the face of shocks and long-term stressors.
NutritionChronic malnutrition has profound, long-term effects on health and life prospects. WFP works with governments and partners to help vulnerable groups, such as women, children and people receiving treatment for HIV and tuberculosis, access nutritious diets. Our programmes include distributing specialized nutritious foods, fortifying staples, designing and implementing school feeding, and enabling dietary diversification.
School health and nutritionWFP works with partners to deliver school-based health and nutrition services. School feeding provides children with the calories they need to fuel their learning, gives parents strong incentive to keep them in school, and helps build the human capital countries need to reach their development potential.
Social protection and safety netsAs the number of people who do not have enough to eat worldwide far exceeds WFP’s capacity to provide assistance, we work with governments to ensure this can be done through national systems, including social protection schemes.
Climate actionClimate change is increasing the frequency of climate-related disasters, creating greater risks of hunger and the breakdown of food systems. WFP is working with governments, international partners, researchers and local communities to analyse and understand the impacts of climate change. Through programmes, innovations, policy and technical support we are helping those most at risk to become climate resilient and food secure.
Smallholder farmers market supportSmallholder farmers are highly vulnerable to hunger. WFP collaborates with national governments to help forge sustainable food systems more inclusive of smallholder farmers along the value chain. This includes buying their produce for WFP programmes, introducing them to formal markets, and enabling access to skills, knowledge and infrastructure to develop their livelihoods and make them more resilient to risks.
Country capacity strengthening and south-south cooperationNational governments are increasingly taking the lead in the fight against hunger. WFP offers a wide range of capacity development and technical assistance services to facilitate the design and delivery of sustainable national solutions to combat hunger and malnutrition. WFP facilitates the transfer of knowledge, skills, resources and technical know-how, including through its Centres of Excellence in Brazil, China and Ivory Coast.
Where we workIn 2019, WFP assisted 97 million people - the largest number since 2012 - in90 countries.
International BoundaryArmistice or International Administrative LineOther line of SeparationThe designations employed and the presentation of material in the map(s) do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of WFP concerning the legal or constitutional status of any country, territory or sea area, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers.
EmergenciesWho we areABOUTTRANSPARENCY AND ACCOUNTABILITYPARTNERSHIPSOur workSAVING LIVESCHANGING LIVESSUPPORTING GOVERNMENTSINNOVATION AND DIGITAL TRANSFORMATIONAbout hungerGet involvedWork with usMedia & resourcesVia Cesare Giulio Viola, 68, 00148 Rome RM, ItalyFollow us on:2022 © World Food ProgrammeAdvanced search
