old id = 455
Home - Good Grief Network
2022
https://www.goodgriefnetwork.org

10-Steps to Personal Resilience & Empowerment in a Chaotic ClimateOur unique 10-Step Program helps individuals and communities build resilience bycreating spaces where people can lean into their painful feelings about the state of the world and reorient their lives toward meaningful action.
Important Notes About Trainings:Affiliate Facilitation Trainingis fororganizationsthat want to train their representatives to run 10-Step Programs within their communities.
FLOW Facilitation Trainingis forindividualswith no organizational affiliation who want to participate in an intensive, 12-week training to become a Certified GGN FLOW Facilitator. FLOW Facilitators can facilitate individually within their own communities, or apply to work with GGN.
As seen in…Click here for a complete list of media coverage.
10MeetingsHeart-Centered Processing in Small Groups10WeeksLAUREL R.
⎯⎯⎯Being part of the caring, articulate community that GGN creates is wonderful; it really did help mitigate feelings of isolation, helplessness, etc.
LISA H.
⎯⎯⎯I thought the facilitators did a beautiful job. They showed up with their full hearts and vulnerability. You could tell they deeply care about this work. And they held the boundaries well…It was a testament to the facilitators that everyone felt comfortable really opening up.
PARK G.
⎯⎯⎯Good Grief Network has helped me metabolize a build-up of climate grief that was leading to burn out and downshifting. Participating in the Good Grief Network is helping me continue my climate activism with more balance, resilience, and presence.
JACQUELINE L.
⎯⎯⎯Utterly worth the hard work.
SHALINI K.
⎯⎯⎯The 10-Steps left me with a greater understanding of myself as well as questions about myself that I will continue to work with. I also gained an understanding of the intersection between personal and planetary resilience and a sense of hope that this community can create the new paradigm.
ABBEY K.
⎯⎯⎯I think the connection aspect of the group and non-judgmental space that is held in the group for people to openly say how they feel and be able to learn and grow from other perspectives is an incredibly useful tool. I am so glad to have found this group!TANIA L.
⎯⎯⎯I think the framing of the entire program, as well as the weekly insights that guide our development along the journey are rich and important. I will return to them.
10-Step ProcessProcess Heavy EmotionsWe believe that certain creative and emergent ideas only become available once we’ve regulated our nervous systems and talked about our painful emotions such as fear, anger, and eco-grief.
Deconstruct Cultural NarrativesWith the support of community, we, who have have been socialized by the dominant culture, do the work of looking at our varying levels of privilege, while undoing our cultural conditioning. When we acknowledge how we have perpetuated systems of oppression, we can stop participating in those systems and refuse to let them live within us.
Build Resilient CommunitiesIs our work helping you cope?​Does your vision of the future include resilient communities?Sign up for our email newsletter!Success!NameEmailSubscribeCopyright ©2022| Good Grief Network
