old id = 471
9 Best Espresso Machines and Accessories for Home Baristas (2022) | WIRED
2022
https://www.wired.com/gallery/best-espresso-machines

To revisit this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
To revisit this article, select My Account, thenView saved storiesJaina GreyThe Best Espresso Machines for the Home BaristaEspresso machines areintimidating. Just look at them, with their screaming hot metal, scalding steam, and polished chrome tubes. Each and every one of those weird little parts plays a role in shaping the perfectly pulled shot. Espresso is as personal as it is technical, which means that shopping for a home espresso machine is kind of a nightmare. Everyone has different butadamantopinions, and sometimes it feels like you need to be a professional just to know how to choose an espresso machine.
That’s why we’ve put together this guide. After testing dozens of coffee machines over the years, the WIRED coffee nerds have pooled their opinions and expertise to compile a list of espresso machines to turn your kitchen into a café.
It’s hard not to be a caff-fiend when you work somewhere called WIRED, so it should come as no surprise that we have an extensive library of coffee coverage. Be sure to check out our other coffee guides, like theBest Latte & Cappuccino Makers,Best Portable Coffee Makers,Best Coffee Subscriptions, andBest Coffee Grinders.
Updated March 2022: We've added the Delonghi Stilosa espresso machine and updated prices throughout.
If you buy something using links in our stories, we may earn a commission. This helps support our journalism.
Learn more. Please also considersubscribing to WIREDBest OverallThe Rancilio Silvia Pro (7/10, WIRED Recommends) is one of my favorite dual-boiler espresso machines. It’s packed with pro-grade features, and it’s built to last. This machine isnotthe Silvia Pro; it’s the Silvia M—but it’s almost identical and hundreds of dollars cheaper.
The sleek silver body is narrow enough to fit on most apartment countertops, and it produces consistent water and steam pressure—which means consistent, well-extracted, café-grade espresso. Most impressively, the interior of the machine doesn’t contain much plastic, and as you’ll be able to tell from its weight (30 pounds), this thing is built like a tank.
By minimizing plastic inside and outside, the company has ensured the machine will last longer, since repeated expansion and contraction caused by heat can make plastic components unstable over time.
Best Dual Boiler (For Speed)Most home espresso machines have only one boiler inside—the pressure chamber that turns water into steam and forces water through the packed beans to extract espresso. With a single boiler, once you brew your espresso you often have to wait before the machine’s ready to steam up your milk or make a second drink. Having an extra boiler is a luxury that makes life much easier.
Pro-grade machines like the Breville Dual Boiler (9/10, WIRED Recommends) have—as the name suggests—two boilers inside. That confers a few advantages: Mostly it lets you jump between its three main functions (coffee, hot water, and steam) without having to wait for the machine to catch up. The Dual Boiler also has other pro-grade features, like a built-in (and adjustable) temperature gauge so you can precisely adjust the temperature of your boilers, which can get you absolutely heavenly espresso if you know what you’re doing.
(Hint: Lower temps, around 190-195 Fahrenheit, get you a brighter shot, though it can be slightly more vegetal and sometimes a bit sour. Higher temps, around 200-205 F, will get you a rich, chocolatey flavor with lots of natural sweetness, but you might get some bitterness in there.)Best for $100Finding a good inexpensive espresso machine is tough, but the Delonghi Stilosa is one of our all-time faves, and it's usually around $100. You're not going to get high-end features like a pressure gauge or built-in grinder, but what the Stilosa does provide is everything you need to make great espresso at home: a solid portafilter, a reliable steam pump, and a steaming wand. It is a little light, so you'll want to brace it when you mount and dismount the portafilter (or it might slide around on you).
After brewing cup after cup of espresso, the Stilosa never showed signs of slowing or breaking down the way many inexpensive machines can. If an espresso maker is too cheaply made, after a few months of use you'll often start to see a sputtering steam wand and notice that the machine is struggling to build up pressure. We never saw these symptoms in the Stilosa, and it honestly changed my opinions about inexpensive espresso machines. It's not as quick or powerful as one of the premium machines on this list, but it's a great place to start learning the ins and outs of espresso, and it will serve you well for a long time to come.
Another Good Budget OptionWhen you’re looking for a budget espresso machine, keep a couple of things in mind: First, look for metal construction over plastic (plastic doesn’t mix well with heat and pressure), and second make sure it can reach at least 15 bars of pressure (for even and consistent espresso extraction). This machine from Gevi checks both of those very important boxes, and it’s a little cutie.
It’s well made and solid. No, it’s not quite as stable or durable as our top picks, but the metal construction does suggest a longevity you’re not likely to get out of a cheaper, more plasticky machine.
Best All-in-OneThis Breville machine produces consistent pressure for espresso, steams milk with an easily adjustable steam wand, and even grinds beans for you. It’s basically a coffee shop that lives on your countertop. Just like its more expensive siblings (we also like theBarista Pro), the Barista Express builds up water pressure gradually—which you can watch on the included pressure gauge—ensuring a smooth and even extraction. Its sturdy, mostly-metal construction and easy cleaning have also helped make it a popular choice for several years now—and a longtime favorite of ours.
Best for Small SpacesThe Bambino is a cute little thing about the size of two cereal boxes side by side. It's a very small, no-frills espresso machine—just a steam wand and buttons for power, one shot, and two shots—but it manages to pack some serious brewing power. There’s no shot timer or adjustable temperatures. It's just a little boiler inside a little machine, but it can extract espresso every bit as well as bigger and more expensive Breville machines.
It is a bit lightweight, so make sure you brace it with both hands when you’re twisting the portafilter in place; mine had a habit of sliding around.
Best Hand-Powered MachineThere’s something satisfying about literallypullingyour own espresso, and this machine allows you to do exactly that. There’s no milk steamer, no boiler, not even a power cable. This thing is all human-powered. You just load it up with coffee and water per themanufacturer’s instructionsand give it a good press. There’s an included pressure gauge so you can keep your extractions as consistent as possible.
Best for PortabilityThis is another human-powered “espresso” machine, and it’s great for travel. Think of it like a big syringe: You fill it with coffee and hot water, push down the plunger, and enjoy a cup of coffee!It’s notexactlyespresso. Coffee technically needs to be extracted under at least 9 bars of pressure to be considered espresso, and the AeroPress is aninfusionbrewing device: The water and coffee grounds hang out and steep like tea. Still, pushing the water through the grounds does make for a cup of coffee that’s very espresso-like, offering the same kind of rich complex flavors you’d get out of a traditional pressurized extraction.
Great for StovetopsMy first coffee pot was a Moka pot, and it lasted for ages. This one is solid stainless steel, with a few plastic accents, like the grip, and it’s a reliable pick for coffee that's stronger than a standard drip machine.
If you want to get technical, espresso must be extracted under at least 9 bars of pressure, and most stovetop Moka pots just don’t make the cut—this one included. However, if you aren't picky, it's often close enough. With agood milk frother like this one, you can make a killer latte with this stovetop not-quite-an-espresso machine.
Pre-Brew AccessoriesThere’s always room to up your game, and there are quite a few additional tools that can help you make the best espresso possible. These are all tools you’d employbeforethe brew, setting the stage for the perfect extraction.
Fellow Atmos Canister for Coffee Beans ($79)A vacuum canister is a great way to store your coffee beans. By vacating the chamber of all air every time you close it, the Fellow Vacuum Canister slows down the degradation of all those flavorful oils and chemical compounds inside your (hopefully locally roasted) favorite coffee beans.
OXO Conical Burr Grinder ($99)This is one of our top picks in ourBest Coffee Grindersguide, and it's a good choice for espresso. Espresso requires a fine and consistent grind, the likes of which you can easily get out of a burr grinder. Just be sure to get in there and give your burrs a sweep now and then—maintenance that the OXO makes easy, with a bean bin that snaps apart without any fuss.
Bezzera Bottomless Portafilter ($80)Nothing will improve your espresso brewing like a bottomless portafilter. Not because it will make your coffeebetter;it’ll makeyoubetter by making you more aware of your mistakes and inconsistencies. Bottomless portafilters are finicky, and when your grind is off or you’ve over-tamped your grounds, the bottomless portafilter lets you see that in how the espresso coats the bottom of the filter and pours down into the cup. Be sure to double-check the circumference on your espresso machine’s group head though (the place the filter attaches). There are a number of standard sizes, so you need to make sure you order the right one. The most common are 53 mm and 58 mm, and almost every bottomless portafilter comes in each of these sizes.
WPM Tamping Mat ($24)Tamping mats are just a thick, soft piece of rubber or silicone, but they make it much easier to maintain a consistent tamping pressure (and a clean tamping space so you won’t stain your kitchen table with coffee or scratch it with the bottom of your tamp). You can also use a folded kitchen towel, but these mats are easy to rinse off.
Crema Distributor & Tamp ($44)Once you put your grounds into your portafilter, the next step is giving them a good, even tamping. You want to use about 30-40 pounds of pressure, and while you can use a scale to determine exactly what that feels like, I find it’s better to just press with your upper body, then extract a shot and see how it went. If it’s too bitter, you tamped too hard; if it’s too watery you didn’t tamp hard enough. A distributor (also called a leveler) makes it easy to get an even surface for you to tamp, and this one has a tamp on one side and a distributor on the other so you can level off your beans, then flip this tool over and give 'em a good tamp. Just make sure you get one that fits the circumference of your machine’s portafilter!Duralex Picardie Shot Glasses, Set of Six ($17)These are my favorite shot glasses in general, but they’re also great espresso shot glasses—tall and narrow enough to allow a wonderfully aerated crema to form on top, and made of tempered glass so they can stand up to the heat. They’re also great for serving up smaller drinks like macchiatos—a shot of espresso with a dollop of froth on top.
Post-Brew AccessoriesOnce your espresso is brewed, steaming away in its tiny little cup, it’s time to consider just what you’re going to do with it. These are some of my favorite accessories for mixing up an excellent beverage, hot or iced.
WPM Wide Mouth Steaming Pitcher ($37)Most hot espresso drinks call for steamed milk, and to steam milk you’re going to need a steamer carafe. Your machine probably came with one, and it’s probably perfectly fine! Think of this pitcher as an upgrade. It’s angled to provide ample room for you to steam up and polish your milk, it’s made of solid stainless steel, and it has a cute little paint job. What’s not to like?Absorbent Bar Mops ($18)When I’m steaming milk, I like to lay a bar mop underneath the steam nozzle and turn the steam on full-blast to clear any debris that may have settled in the wand. Having a mop underneath means you’re not getting water everywhere, and it serves the secondary purpose of giving you a rag soaked in hot water to clean up your steam wand and countertop after you’re all done.
Holy Kakow Flavored Syrups ($17)If you’re mixing up a sweet drink, you should really consider investing in high-quality syrups. Holy Kakow is my favorite brand by far, and it’s a mainstay of cafés in the Pacific Northwest. If you’ve ever had a mocha in Portland and wondered why yours don’t ever taste that good, it’s because of Holy Kakow. The company makes avariety of different syrups, but my favorite is definitely the chocolate syrup. I’m a sucker for a good iced mocha.
Origami Latte Cup with Saucer ($17)I recommend extracting your espresso into a shot glass for the best flavor, but if you're making a latte, you'll need a cup after your milk is frothed—and what’s a latte without an adorable little ceramic mug to enjoy it in? These are pricey, but they’re incredibly well-made. I have a few for my morning or afternoon coffees.
WIRED COUPONSExtra 20% off sitewide - Dyson promo code 2022GoPro Hot Deal: $150 off the new HERO10 Black BonesSamsung coupon - 45% off select items + free shippingExtra $100 off XPS & Inspiron laptops, desktops & 2 in 1s with Dell coupon codeDeal of the Day: 1-day flash sale for 20% off electronics & appliancesAT&T Internet promo code - $50 reward with AT&T Fiber orderMore From WIREDContact© 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of ourUser AgreementandPrivacy Policy and Cookie StatementandYour California Privacy Rights.
Wiredmay earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
Ad Choices
