old id = 3685
First-Ever Artificial Neuron Could Let Us Repair Brain Injuries with Silicon
2022
https://singularityhub.com/2019/12/06/first-ever-artificial-neuron-could-let-us-repair-brain-injuries-with-silicon

First-Ever Artificial Neuron Could Let Us Repair Brain Injuries with SiliconThe merging of man and machine is a staple of sci-fi and at the heart of the philosophy of transhumanism.
But interfacing our brains with computers has proven incredibly hard, despitethe fact thatboth essentially run on electrical impulses.
Imagine,for example,if a brain injury could be repaired with a computer chip. That may not be too far off;this week, researchers reported on a“solid-state neuron”that accurately modelsthe behavior of biologicalnerve cells.
Ina paper inNature Communications,theteamsaysthe devices could beplugged into biological neuralcircuitsto repair damage or disease.
“Until now neurons have been like black boxes, but we have managed to open the black box and peer inside,” project leader Alain Nogaret, from the University of Bath in the UK, said ina press release. “Our work is paradigm-changing because it provides a robust method to reproduce the electrical properties of real neurons in minute detail.”A major reason it’s been so hard to accurately replicate the behavior of neurons in silicon is because the way they respond to stimuli is non-linear. In other words, a signal twice as strong won’t necessarily elicit a response that’s twice as strong.
The researchers solved the problem by collecting data from two types of rat neuron.
The firstwasfrom the hippocampus region of the brain, which is involved in learning and memory, and the second from the respiratory center, which controls breathing.
They used this data to estimate the parameters that control how ions flow through the neurons and then used those parametersto create a model that explains how neurons respond to stimuli from other nerves. They then used thatmodel to build analogue silicon chips that accurately modeled the behavior of real neurons.
To test their chips, they subjected themto 60 different stimulation protocolsand compared their responsesto thoseseen in rat hippocampalandbrain stem neurons. The chips achieved a 94percentaccuracy.
Critically, the bionic neurons use just140 nanoWatts of power—a billionththe amountof a regular microprocessor, which makes them much more practical for long-term applications inside the body. Each chip isroughly 0.1millimetersin diameter, but many of them would need to be combined to create a practical implant, which would be a few millimeters wide.
The researchers have already spun out a company called Ceryx to start developing a smart pacemaker that uses the bionic neurons to respond to signals rather than simply providing a steady beat like a regular pacemaker. But they say their approach is generic and could be used to replicate any of the body’s many different types of neurons.
That could make it possible to repair defective circuitsthatcauseconditions like heart failure and sleep apnea, but could also potentially replace damaged nerves caused by spinal injuries or help connect robotic limbs to people’s nervous systems, the researcherstoldThe Guardian.
One potential limitation is that the bionic neuronsdo not replicate the complex connectivityof real ones. Their model doesn’t cover the many branching dendrites that connect neurons toeach other,and adding those dynamics might require further components.
The researchers also say they arealong way from replicating larger, more complex brain circuits, and light years offfrombeing able to reproduce an entire brain.
University of Manchester’s Stephen Furber, who has designed amillion-processor computer called SpiNNakerdesigned to model large-scale brain networks, toldThe Guardianthat using this approach to create networks of even a few hundred million neurons would be unfeasible—and the brain contains roughly 86 billionof them.
“Because the approach is detailed and laboriously painstaking, it can really only be applied in practice to smallish neural units, such as the respiratory neurons described above, but there are quite a few critical small neural control circuits that are vital to keeping us alive,” he added.
Image Credit: An artificial neuron in its protective casing. Photo courtesy ofUniversity of BathFollow Edd:LatestThis Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through May 21)Volvo and DHL Are Partnering on Hub-to-Hub Autonomous TruckingHow a Volcanic Bombardment in Ancient Australia Led to the World’s Greatest Climate CatastropheRELATEDThe Brain Has a Built-in System to Keep Unwanted Memories Out, Study FindsScientists Used Brain Scans to See How Magic Mushrooms Battle Depression. Here’s What They FoundLargest-Ever Collection of Brain Maps Charts How the Brain Changes Over a LifetimeHow the Extinction of Ice Age Mammals May Have Forced Us to Invent CivilizationGet the latest news from Singularity Hub!Singularity University, Singularity Hub, Singularity Summit, SU Labs, Singularity Labs, Exponential Medicine, Exponential Finance and all associated logos and design elements are trademarks and/or service marks of Singularity Education Group.
© 2022 Singularity Education Group. All Rights Reserved.
Singularity University is not a degree granting institution.
