old id = 3749
We Read This 800-Page Report on the State of Longevity Research So You Don’t Have To
2022
https://singularityhub.com/2018/02/14/we-read-this-800-page-report-on-longevity-research-so-you-dont-have-to

We Read This 800-Page Report on the State of Longevity Research So You Don’t Have ToThe longevity field is bustling but still fragmented, and the “silver tsunami” is coming.
That is the takeaway ofThe Science of Longevity, the behemoth first volume of a four-part series offering a bird’s-eye view of the longevity industry in 2017. The report, a joint production of theBiogerontology Research Foundation,Deep Knowledge Life Science, Aging Analytics Agency, andLongevity.International, synthesizes the growing array of academic and industry ventures related to aging, healthspan, and everything in between.
This ishuge, not only in scale but also in ambition. The report, totally worth a readhere, will be followed by four additional volumes in 2018, covering topics ranging from the business side of longevity ventures to financial systems to potential tensions between life extension and religion.
And that’s just the first step. The team hopes to publish updated versions of the report annually, giving scientists, investors, and regulatory agencies an easy way to keep their finger on the longevity pulse.
“In 2018, ‘aging’ remains an unnamed adversary in an undeclared war. For all intents and purposes it is mere abstraction in the eyes of regulatory authorities worldwide,” the authorswrite.
That needs to change.
People often arrive at the field of aging from disparate areas with wildly diverse opinions and strengths. The report compiles these individual efforts at cracking aging into a systematic resource—a “periodic table” for longevity that clearly lays out emerging trends and promising interventions.
The ultimate goal? A global framework serving as a road map to guide the burgeoning industry. With such a framework in hand, academics and industry alike are finally poised to petition the kind of large-scale investments and regulatory changes needed to tackle aging with a unified front.
The Aging GlobeThe global population is rapidly aging. And our medical and social systems aren’t ready to handle this oncoming “silver tsunami.”Take the medical field. Many age-related diseases such as Alzheimer’s lack effective treatment options. Others, including high blood pressure, stroke, lung or heart problems, require continuous medication and monitoring, placing enormous strain on medical resources.
What’s more, because disease risk rises exponentially with age, medical care for the elderly becomes a game of whack-a-mole: curing any individual disease such as cancer only increases healthy lifespan bytwo to three yearsbefore another one hits.
That’s why in recent years there’s beenincreasing supportfor turning the focus to the root of the problem: aging. Rather than tackling individual diseases, geroscience aims to add healthy years to our lifespan—extending “healthspan,”so to speak.
Despite this relative consensus, the field still faces a roadblock. The US FDA does not yet recognize aging as abona fidedisease. Without such a designation, scientists are banned from testing potential interventions for aging in clinical trials (that said, many have used alternate measures such asage-related biomarkersorAlzheimer’s symptomsas a proxy).
Luckily, the FDA’s stance is set to change. The promising anti-aging drug metformin, for example,is already in clinical trials, examining its effect on a variety of age-related symptoms and diseases. This report, and others to follow, may help push progress along.
“It is critical for investors, policymakers, scientists, NGOs, and influential entities to prioritize the amelioration of the geriatric world scenario and recognize aging as a critical matter of global economic security,” the authorssay.
Biomedical GerontologyThe causes of aging are complex, stubborn, and not all clear.
But the report lays out two main streams of intervention with already promising results.
The first is to understand the root causes of aging and stop them before damage accumulates. It’s like meddling with cogs and other inner workings of a clock to slow it down, the authors say.
The report lays out several treatments to keep an eye on.
Geroprotective drugs is a big one. Often repurposed from drugs already on the market, these traditional small molecule drugs target a wide variety of metabolic pathways that play a role in aging. Think anti-oxidants, anti-inflammatory, and drugs that mimic caloric restriction, a proven way to extend healthspan in animal models.
More exciting are the emerging technologies. One is nanotechnology. Nanoparticles of carbon, “bucky-balls,” for example,have already been shownto fight viral infections and dangerous ion particles, as well as stimulate the immune system and extend lifespan in mice (though others question the validity of the results).
Blood is another promising, if surprising, fountain of youth: recent studies found that molecules in the blood of the young rejuvenate theheart,brain, andmusclesof aged rodents, though many of these findings have yet to be replicated.
Rejuvenation BiotechnologyThe second approach is repair and maintenance.
Rather than meddling with inner clockwork, here we force back the hands of a clock to set it back. The main example? Stem cell therapy.
This type of approach would especially benefit the brain, which harbors small, scattered numbers of stem cells that deplete with age. For neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer’s, in which neurons progressively die off, stem cell therapy could in theory replace those lost cells and mend those broken circuits.
Once a blue-sky idea, the discovery of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), where scientists can turn skin and other mature cells back into a stem-like state, hugely propelled the field into near reality. But to date, stem cells haven’t been widely adopted in clinics.
It’s “a toolkit of highly innovative, highly invasive technologies with clinical trials still a great many years off,” the authorssay.
But there is a silver lining. The boom in 3D tissue printing offers an alternative approach to stem cells in replacing aging organs.
Recent investmentfrom theMethuselah Foundationand other institutions suggests interest remains high despite still being a ways from mainstream use.
A Disruptive Future“We are finally beginning to see an industry emerge from mankind’s attempts to make sense of the biological chaos,” the authorsconclude.
Looking through the trends, they identified several technologies rapidly gaining steam.
One isartificial intelligence, which is already used tobolster drug discovery. Machine learning may alsohelp identify new longevity genesorbring personalized medicine to the clinicbased on a patient’s records or biomarkers.
Another issenolytics, a class of drugs thatkill off“zombie cells.” Over 10 prospective candidates are already in the pipeline, with some expected to enter the market in less than a decade, the authorssay.
Finally, there’s the big gun—gene therapy. The treatment, unlike others mentioned, can directly target the root of any pathology. With a snip (or a swap), genetic tools can turn off damaging genes or switch on ones that promote a youthful profile. It is the most preventative technology at our disposal.
There have already been some success stories in animal models. Using gene therapy, rodents given a boost in telomerase activity, which lengthens the protective caps of DNA strands,live healthier for longer.
“Although it is the prospect farthest from widespread implementation, it may ultimately prove the most influential,” the authorssay.
Ultimately, can we stop the silver tsunami before it strikes?Perhaps not, the authorssay. But we do have defenses: the technologies outlined in the report, though still immature, could one day stop the oncoming tidal wave in its tracks.
Now we just have to bring them out of the lab and into the real world. To push the transition along, the team launchedLongevity.International, an online meeting ground that unites various stakeholders in the industry.
By providing scientists, entrepreneurs, investors, and policy-makers a platform for learning and discussion, the authorssay, we may finally generate enough drive to implement our defenses against aging. The war has begun.
Read the report in fullhere, and watch out for others coming soonhere. The second part of the report profiles 650 (!!!) longevity-focused research hubs, non-profits, scientists, conferences, and literature. It’s an enormously helpful resource—totally worth keeping it in your back pocket for future reference.
Image Credit:Worraket/Shutterstock.comFollow Shelly:LatestThis Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through May 21)Volvo and DHL Are Partnering on Hub-to-Hub Autonomous TruckingHow a Volcanic Bombardment in Ancient Australia Led to the World’s Greatest Climate CatastropheRELATEDA One-and-Done CRISPR Gene Therapy Will Aim to Prevent Heart AttacksA Virus Just Wiped Out Antibiotic-Resistant Infection in an Immunocompromised PatientLargest Genetic Study to Date Unveils DNA Profiles That Lead to CancerHow the Extinction of Ice Age Mammals May Have Forced Us to Invent CivilizationGet the latest news from Singularity Hub!Singularity University, Singularity Hub, Singularity Summit, SU Labs, Singularity Labs, Exponential Medicine, Exponential Finance and all associated logos and design elements are trademarks and/or service marks of Singularity Education Group.
© 2022 Singularity Education Group. All Rights Reserved.
Singularity University is not a degree granting institution.
