old id = 3790
12 Best Coffee Makers for 2020: Pour-Over, French Press, Espresso | SELF
2022
https://www.self.com/gallery/best-coffee-makers

The Best Coffee Makers, According to Highly Caffeinated ExpertsByAli FrancisFinding the best coffee maker for yourmorning brewcan be deeply personal: Some people are pour-over purists, while others like their coffee strong and bitter à la Italian stovetop moka pot, or the smooth and aromatic pour they get from a French press (called acafetièrein France, though—fun fact—it actually originated in Italy). Others might want something quick and easy that gets the job done without much hassle and cleanup involved. There are as many models available as there arebeans to fill them with, so to help you narrow down your search, we tapped baristas and coffee shop owners around the country for their recommendations on the best coffee makers for brewing café-quality java at home.
Here you’ll find everything from fancy espresso machines to classic, low-tech drippers (which would makegreat giftsthis year, if you’re not just trying tostock your own kitchen). So whether coffee is your true love or your quarantine lifeblood, these are the professional-approved must-haves for anyone whoneeds a little pepright now.
All products featured on SELF are independently selected by our editors. However, when you buy something through our retail links, we may earn an affiliate commission.
Hario V60 Ceramic Coffee Dripper (Size 02)Casey Wojtalewicz, founder ofCanyon Coffeein L.A., loves this ceramic dripper for its portability and versatility. “You can always brew your coffee right into a mug or over ice in a jar for a flash cold brew,” he says. Michael Broderick, owner ofOrange Cat Coffee Co.
in Buffalo, agrees, adding that the device is simple to use and clean up after as well.
To use: Pre-wet the filter, then place the dripper over your vessel of choice and fill it with two scoops of ground coffee. Pour enough boiled water in to wet the coffee, wait 30 seconds while it “blooms,” then do as Wojtalewicz does: “Continue filling slowly from the center, in a circular motion.”AeroPress Coffee and Espresso MakerWhile you can only make max three single cups of coffee at a time with this lightweight device, “you can brew just about anykindof coffee; strong Americano-style beverages or iced coffee or just a regular old filter brew,” says Oodie Taliaferro, president of theAustin Coffee Collective. With plenty of variables to play with—like switching up “the coffee-to-water ratio, grind setting, inverted versus normal setting, and water temperature”—you’re sure to produce a great cup quickly, Wojtalewicz agrees.
The brand also prides itself on creating grit-free brews, thanks to a full submersion method thatextractsthe coffee through micro-filters. Science! As for which types of coffee work best in an AeroPress, Wojtalewicz likes “bright, floral” blends for a “really nice tea-like experience.” And if you’re looking to take the Aeropress on the go, the brand also sells a slightly smaller version, called the Aeropress Go, that campers and backpackers love.
Bialetti Moka Stovetop Espresso MachineThis iconic Italian model is “most likely the coffee maker your grandma had in the kitchen,” Wojtalewicz says. But it’s stuck around for a reason! A moka pot is simple to use, comes in a range of sizes (to suit your work-from-home needs), and brews rich, aromatic coffee in minutes by passing boiling water through ground coffee. The key for not burning your batch—which the moka pot is infamous for—is to stay close by. Once you hear the coffee percolating, Wojtalewicz recommends turning the heat to medium or low to let the process finish. Add more hot water for an Americano or steamed milk for a cappuccino.
Breville BES870XL Espresso MachineLet’s raise a pinky finger to all our coffee aficionados in the house: Consider this machine the Swiss Army knife of caffeinated beverages. “With a built-in grinder, espresso maker, and steam wand,” it’ll have you making pro-level lattes, cappuccinos, flat whites, and more, says Cassandre Davilmar, founder ofLakou Cafein Brooklyn. For a great shot of espresso, she recommends brewing a fine-ground coffee for 20 to 24 seconds. For us average…joes…YouTubehas some helpful guides to using this machine.
Takeya Cold Brew Coffee MakerDavilmar loves this quart-size jug because she says “it’s easy for anyone to use at home.” It’s also compact—a win for cabinet space—and virtually waste-free, given that “no paper filters are required.” To use: Fill the infuser with coarsely ground coffee, add cold water, seal and shake the container, and store it in the fridge for 12 to 24 hours. The result? “A concentratedcold brewwith low acidity and bold flavors” that’ll get you through the work-from-home weeks.
Bodum Chambord French Press Coffee MakerBoth Broderick and Davilmar turn to this classic press when they need a reliable and easy route to coffee. Add coarse grounds into the jug, cover with hot water, and allow to steep for a few minutes before plunging. The Bodum model “produces a consistently rich, aromatic, and full-bodied” cup, Broderick says. Which is ideal to have conversation with friends over, Davilmar adds, or, you know, every morning.
Ah, parfait!CHEMEX 8-Cup Pour-Over Glass CoffeemakerMargo Sivin, barista and former coffee lead atDig Inn, who loves objects that are both functional and beautiful, says this glass Chemex is “literally a work of art.
” Like other pour-over methods, Sivin finds Chemex to deliver coffee that’s smooth and lighter in body than, say, a French press. She opts for the eight-cup size, which is “perfect for two on a slow Sunday,” and uses beans that are ground to “about the coarseness of table salt.”Kalita Wave 155 Coffee DripperA number of our experts recommend the Kalita Wave model for its flavor and consistency. Taliaferro says that’s because the flat bottom, multiple drain holes, and undulating ridges keep the filter elevated, which “promotes air flow and even extraction.” Which, Tohm Ifergan, CEO ofDayglowin L.A., says results in “a cleaner cup with more flavor clarity and acidity.” As for Sivin, it’s simply the perfect go-to for an afternoon pick-me-up for one.
Bodum PEBO Vacuum Coffee MakerAccording to Broderick, this “fun, eye-catching, infusion-style brewer” makes for a clean, smooth coffee. The bulbous device sits atop the stove—or, for the campers here, the included portable burner—which heats water in the lower chamber. The vapor forces the boiling water to mingle with the coffee grounds, and the resulting pressure sucks the brewed coffee down into the bottom chamber for serving. Given the intricate design, Broderick says it is a little more time consuming to clean “but well worth the extra care”—particularly for the mornings you aren’t racing out the door. Like, uh, every day since March.
Bonavita One-Touch Coffee BrewerAccording to Taliaferro, the diner-style coffee makers that keep your brew piping all day via a hot plate actually “degrade the coffee’s flavor rather quickly.” The Bonavita’s thermal, insulated pot keeps coffee warm without any interference, which means Taliaferro always has “good coffee ready to drink at home.” To use, load your ground coffee into the brew cone, press start, and approximately five minutes later you’ll have a full carafe ready to go.
Origami Dripper (Small)This stunning, colorful cone is more than meets the eye. The ceramic cone retains heat, and the grooves allow for airflow that increases the extraction (for a quicker brew time). To make an even more potent cup, Ifergan opts for a finer-ground coffee, which is more soluble than the coarse varieties. The result? A smooth blend with “noticeably less astringency.”April Brewer Pour Over KitFor a crisp, sweet, and “tea-like” brew, Ifergan deploys this complete pour-over setup from Copenhagen-based April. According to the brand, the unique flat-bottom structure regulates the water flow rate and air pockets ensure a consistent result every pour. Lest we forget, you can brew directly into the adorable matching cup that “keeps the temperature stable,” Ifergan says.
SELF does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Any information published on this website or by this brand is not intended as a substitute for medical advice, and you should not take any action before consulting with a healthcare professional.
More from SelfContact© 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of ourUser AgreementandPrivacy Policy and Cookie StatementandYour California Privacy Rights.
SELFmay earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
Ad Choices
