old id = 3791
48 Best Subscription Gifts for Mother's Day in 2022: Book of the Month, BarkBox, Stitch Fix, Winc | SELF
2022
https://www.self.com/gallery/best-subscription-gifts

48 Thoughtful Subscription Gifts for Every Type of PersonByTiffany Dodson,Sara Coughlin, andMalia GriggsWhether you're short on ideas or running out of time to shop, there's a wide array of subscription gifts that will make any gift-giving occasion a hit. Don't worry about hunting for alast-minute gift ideafor someone whoseems to have everything—we've got you covered with something that they'll love to receive for special occasions like birthdays, anniversaries, holidays likeMother's DayandFather's Day, and beyond.
The best subscription boxes do the curation for the recipient, or let them curate a box of goodies to their particular tastes. When gifted, these boxes usually arrive in the form of an email, so you don’t have to worry about timing the shipping (that's up to the person who subscribes). Best of all, once ordered, most subscription boxes arrive on a weekly, bimonthly, monthly, or quarterly cadence, too, so it’s really multiple gifts in one.
One of the greatest aspects of subscription boxes is the variety of options to choose from. For the person who uses their skin-care routine as a stress reliever, abeauty subscription boxthat introduces them to popular and trending beauty products or includes their personal tried-and-true favorites. If their closet could use a refresh, there are clothing subscription boxes that pair them with a stylist and let try them before they buy, as well aslingerie subscription boxesthat send high-end lacy goodies. If they're big on fitness and likestreaming workoutsfrom their living room, anactivewear subscription boxor an adventure-based subscription like Cairn or Wantable is ideal to try a variety of new fitness gear and accessories. Perhaps asnack subscriptionto indulge in their snack cravings? No matter their tastes, you'll find subscription gifts that will suit your loved ones' needs and cravings.
Whether you're shopping for your mom thisMother's Day(or mother figure) or an upcoming event likegraduation, you can add a little more joy to giftees' lives with one of thesethoughtful subscription gifts. Since there are hundreds of deluxe options to choose from, below, we’ve narrowed the playing field by rounding up a few of our favorites, includingwine subscriptionslike Winc,coffee subscriptionslikeAtlas Coffee Cluband Trade Coffee,pet subscription boxeslike BarkBox,meal delivery serviceslike Home Chef, plant delivery services, and so much more.
All products featured on SELF are independently selected by our editors. However, when you buy something through our retail links, we may earn an affiliate commission.
For the Person Who Adores Fresh Flowers: UrbanStemsEnsure their day is brightened on a monthly basis by signing them up for aflowery delivery subscriptionto UrbanStems, which sends tastefully arranged bouquets of fresh flowers. These gorgeous bouquets feature a variety of bold, beautiful curations, comprised of plants like roses, snapdragons, and Monstera leaves. (And if they're out of town, it's easy for them to pause or skip deliveries.)Availability:Nationwide, excluding P.O. boxes and military basesCost:The Classic plan is $55 per delivery (glass vase free with first delivery); the Seasonal Plan is $75 per delivery (glass vase and scented candle free with first delivery); the Luxe plan is $105 per delivery (designer vase free with every delivery and luxury candle free with first box).
For the Person Who's a Self-Proclaimed Coffee Snob: Atlas Coffee ClubFor the person who turns up their nose at Dunkin' Donuts, give them thegift of great coffee(and variety!). Every month,SELF CertifiedAtlas Coffee Club sends freshly-roasted coffee beans from around the world with flavor notes, a postcard, and brewing tips.
Availability:NationwideCost:Gift subscriptions are available in three-, six-, and 12-month packs, starting at $60.
Editor's note:Right now, Atlas Coffee Club is offering discounts on its subscriptions, so a three-month gift is $50For the Person Who's a Fruit Fiend: Harry & David Fruit of the Month ClubFrom giant strawberries in May to dark sweet plums in September, Harry & David's popular Fruit of the Month club ships some of the freshest fruits you can find, in quantities ranging from about two to six pounds. You can select when the subscription starts, and since you get a sneak peek of every month's offerings, you can make sure your gift begins in time for your friend to receive all of their favorites.
Availability:NationwideCost:Subscriptions start at $100 for three months.
For the Person Who Prioritizes Self-Care: TheraBoxStocked withskin-careproducts, bath and body items, sleepwear, journaling prompts, and activities meant to inspire reflection and meditation, TheraBox is essentially a wind-down routine in a box. With every new monthly subscription box, your recipient can expect six to eight items curated withrelaxationandself-carein mind.
Availability:InternationallyCost:A month-to-month plan costs $35 per month, three months cost $100, six months cost $192, and a one-year plan costs $372.
For the Person Who Sniffs and Swills: WincIf they love trying new wines but are aweebit indecisive,wine subscription serviceWinc ships ultra-personalized bottles of wine from around the world to their door. Each bottle is rated on a scale by Winc's community of subscribers, and after taking a quiz on their preferences, Winc suggests different options to suit your friend's tastes.
Availability:Based on zip codeCost:Gift cards start at $60, which covers a one-month subscription.
For the Person Who’s Super Active on Goodreads: Book of the MonthGive your friend or parent who’s alwaysreadingthe gift of a new hardcover or paperback every month from Book of the Month. They can choose from five handpicked books to figure out which one (or more) they’re most interested in reading. If your loved one is a slowerreader, they can skip a month, or if they blow through books, they can select up to two extra reads a month. The book subscription service also offers subscribers the option to form avirtual book club, for fun and easy discussions no matter where their fellow readers live—making it a greatlong-distance giftfor friends, family members, and partners alike.
Availability:NationwideCost:A three-month gift subscription is $50; six months is $100; one year is $180.
For the Person Who Experiments in the Kitchen: Home ChefWhether they're seasoned chefs, cook regularly but would love some variety, or new to the whole cooking-for-themselves thing,SELF Certified, best-sellingmeal-kit delivery serviceHome Chef makes it easy to put together new meals. Every week (and five weeks in advance), they can choose from a range of recipes, precise amounts of fresh ingredients ship to their door, and then they can whip up their entrée in about 30 minutes or less. Nicely, there are meat, veg, dairy-free, gluten-free, soy-free, and many options that fit different dietary restrictions. Plus, if they really aren't feeling cooking, Home Chef offers five-minute oven-ready lunches and dinners, too.
Availability:NationwideCost:Gift cards start at $25, and you can either send a physical gift card or an e-gift card.
For the Person Who's a Little Cheesy: Murray's CheeseFrom the Classic Cheese of the Month club to the Cheesemonger's Picks subscription to the all-encompassing Cheese Board of the Month, the giftable subscriptions available at Murray's Cheese are enough to make any brie lover or gouda hound weep. There's even aMac and Cheesesubscription if the gift recipient you have in mind loves pasta almost as much as they love cheese.
Availability:Nationwide, with the exception of APO and FPO destinationsCost:Gift subscriptions start at $63 per month for a month-to-month subscription.
For the Person Who Wants to Refresh Their Wellness Routine: FabFitFunThis extremely popular subscription service ships six to eightnew beauty and wellness productsfrom high-end brands like Dr. Brandt, West Elm, and Fenty Beauty, on a seasonal basis. Subscribers can enjoy a wide variety of items in every box, from hair treatments to silky bathrobes to ankle weights, all of which are curated in the name of elevating their standard self-care regimen.
Availability:NationwideCost:Gift cards start at $25.
For the Person Who's Ready to be a Plant Parent: The SillOffering both classic and pet-friendly plant subscription plans, The Sill will ship the gardener in your life one new plant and one new planter (in the subscriber's choice of color) every month, for a minimum of three months. Users then have the option to cancel, pause, or renew their subscription. The plants included in both plans tend to beeasy for beginnersto care for, making this subscription a fantastic gift for plant pros looking to expand theirindoor greenerysetup or novices who are still waiting for theirgreen thumbsto come in.
Availability:Nationwide, with the exception of Hawaii and AlaskaCost:Gift cardsstart at $180 for a three-month subscription, and theClassic subscriptioncosts $60 per month.
For the Person Who's a Foodie and/or a Vegan: Daily HarvestAnyone with a sweet tooth might get hooked on Daily Harvest’s nondairy smoothies andScoopsice cream, which comes in four different flavors, from a fudgey chocolate to a crunchy swirled black-sesame flavor. But that is not to count out Daily Harvest's savory options, which range from soups to flatbreads to grain bowls.
Availability:NationwideCost:Acustom gift boxis $75; a Scoops gift box is $55; gift cards can be purchased for $50 to $200.
For the Person Going Through a Style Transition: Stitch FixStitch Fix is, essentially, a personal shopper in a box. Subscribers get the ball rolling by sharing their preferences around price, fit, and style, and then Stitch Fix sends a curated selection of clothing that suits their tastes. If something isn't a hit, it can be returned or exchanged for free. Subscribers only pay for what they keep.
Availability:NationwideCost:Gift cards start at $20.
For the Person Who Crafts to Unwind: Cratejoy Adults & Crafts CrateThis nifty craft crate is a tinkerer's dream in one tidy box, with a new skill or technique highlighted in every kit. One month, the theme might be woodworking. The next, your friend may be introduced to the fascinating world of clockmaking. If your loved one has scrapbooked to their heart's content and wants to level up their DIY game, this will make a great gift.
Availability:InternationallyCost:A 12-month plan costs $31 per month, a six-month plan costs $32 per month, a three-month plan costs $33 per month, and a single-month plan costs $34.
For the Person Who Never Orders Vanilla: Harry & David Chocolate of the Month ClubFans of classic truffles and those who prefer combination confections like chocolate-covered fruit or popcorn will be equally pleased with Harry & David's all-chocolate, all-the-time subscription. Simply select which month you'd like to start with (and which treat you'd like your loved one to receive first) and then cross your fingers they'll share some with you.
Availability:NationwideCost:Subscriptions start at $115 for three months.
For the Person Who Deserves Their Own “Top Shelf”: BirchboxBirchbox is one of the most well-knownbeauty subscription boxesfor makeup and skin-care fiends, and it has a good reputation for a reason. Birchbox’s curated subscription boxes include a range of travel-size goodies from cult-favorite makeup, hair, and skin-care brands like Kiehl’s and Benefit so that people can dabble without committing to a full-size product. It’s a good choice for anyone who loves to test out new things and keep their beauty stash well stocked.
Availability:NationwideCost:Gift subscriptions range from three-month plans to annual plans, starting at $45 for women.
For the Person Who Loves a Good Cuppa: Sips ByGive the gift of variety to thetea loverin your life with the monthly Sips by Box, which contains four premium loose leaf teas, a tasting note and steeping guide, and reusable tea filters. They'll receive enough tea to make at least 16 cups, and they can even make their own Sips by profile to rate and review the blends they've tried.
Availability:NationwideCost:Gift cardsstart at $48 for a three-month subscription.
For the Person Who Has a Sophisticated Sweet Tooth: Candy ClubCandy Club elevates your standard candy snacking experience by working with a variety of producers, including small-batch artisans, to offer inventive treats that are as colorful and cute as they are tasty. With five gift box options to choose from, including the mostly sweet Spring Fling set and the mostly sour Charming Chews set, Candy Club has something to satisfy all stripes of dessert lovers.
Availability:Nationwide, with the exception of Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico and the other U.S. territoriesCost:A one-month gift subscription costs $50 plus shipping, while both three-month and six-month gift subscriptions cost $30 per month plus shipping..
For the Person Who Sticks to an All-Veggie Diet: Purple CarrotThey don’t have to be a full-onveganorvegetarianto enjoy the benefits of Purple Carrot’s versatilemeal subscription service. Each week, Purple Carrot sends fresh, plant-based ingredients and a weekly recipe booklet to create eight dinners, plus two breakfast and lunch recipes total. Recipes include mouth-watering dishes like vegan chick’n and dumplings and breakfasttacos, plus snacks like cookies, dried fruit, and more. As an added bonus, much of Purple Carrot’s packaging is eco-friendly, making it easy to recycle the materials. After choosing to gift in either a two-serving plan or four-serving one, you can decide on the number of meal-kit boxes to send your friend and include a personalized message for the perfect send-off.
Availability:Nationwide, with the exception of Alaska and HawaiiCost:Gift cards start at $50.
For the Person Who Lives for Sheet Masks: GlossyboxIf they're in the market for high-quality makeup and skincare that comes in full sizes instead of samples (and who could blame them?), Glossybox shipments come packed with picks from brands like Glow Recipe, SkinMedica, and DHC. Each box has five products and is valued at $60.
Availability:NationwideCost:Gift a one-month plan for $24 per month; three months for $59; six months for $111; 12 months for $210.
For the Person Who Describes Themselves As an Optimist: Cratejoy HopeBoxBrimming with uplifting stickers and books, rejuvenating bath soaks, relaxing scented candles, and downright adorable knit snuggle buds, HopeBox's deliveries are bound to put a smile on your giftee's face and let them know you're thinking of them.
Availability:NationwideCost:One-month subscriptions cost $55; three-month subscriptions cost $53 per month.
For the Person Who Craves Cookies: Goldbelly Monthly Cookie SubscriptionThe humble cookie gets the tribute it so deserves in this monthly subscription plan from Goldbelly. Offerings range from the chunky to delicate; from rainbow to black and white; from iced to ice cream-filled. The cookies arrive from all over the country, freshly baked and ready to enjoy (ideally with a glass of milk, for the purists out there).
Availability:Nationwide, with the exception of Puerto Rico, APO, and FPO destinationsCost:Subscriptions cost $49 per month and are available in packs of three, six, nine, or 12 months.
For the Person Who Pins: DecocratedHome décor enthusiasts will love Decocrated's quarterly subscription, which ships eight curated pieces (including tabletop items, pillow covers, wall art, and DIY projects) and a styling guide filled with tips from interior decoration experts. In addition to the standard seasonal boxes, Decocrated also offersholiday add-on boxes, for the person whose personal passion is pumpkin carving or decking the halls.
Availability:NationwideCost:Gift cards start at $50.
For the Person Who's Looking for a Signature Fragrance: ScentbirdScentbird offers a vast catalog of over 500perfumesto its monthly subscribers, from best-selling classics to up-and-coming blends. Your giftee can take a quiz to help determine their scent preferences, make their selections, then get ready to receive their new fragrance in Scentbird's streamlined, travel-friendly sized bottles. Eachperfume bottlecontains about 140 sprays and should last until the next shipment arrives.
Availability:NationwideCost:Gift subscriptions start at $44 for three months.
For the Person Who Laughs in the Face of a Brain Freeze: Goldbelly Ice Cream Monthly SubscriptionJust in time for hot summer weather, Goldbelly's ice cream subscription takes recipients on a nationwide tour of the very best scoops you can find in San Francisco, Austin, and beyond. You can choose either an order of five or six pints of ice cream, or six to 24 scrumptious ice cream sandwiches. While ice cream is always a welcome surprise, make sure you give your friend a heads up when their package is on the way—we wouldn't want them to come home to a box of ice cream soup.
Availability:Nationwide, with the exception of Puerto Rico, APO, and FPO destinationsCost:Subscriptions cost $90 per month and are available in packs of three, six, nine, or 12 months.
For the Person Who Craves Variety: Bespoke PostFor the person who doesn’t want to feel limited to a single-themed box, there’s Bespoke Post, a subscription service that aims to introduce subscribers to something new with each box—like high-quality barware, the right tools to use for an extra-close shave, and more. Bespoke Post curates lifestyle, grooming, and style products in each box based on a certain theme, like aself-carebox, for the recipient to keep, swap, or skip within the first five days of the month. Each subscriber can toggle between boxes or swap out specific products within a designated themed box. It's a greatsubscription box for the menin your life, too.
In addition to pre-curated boxes, Bespoke Post offers stand-alone products that can be purchased individually or added to an existing box order. You can buy someone a digital card toward a monthly subscription or bundle a box with a gift card so they can reap all the benefits this membership has to offer and then some.
Availability:Nationwide and Canada (shipments to Canada will incur an additional $10 fee)Cost:Gift cards range in price from $25 to $300.
For the Person Who Always Has Something Burning: Brooklyn Candle StudioAnyone whosecandlecollection could rival a Bath & Body Works might enjoy some new scents from Brooklyn Candle Studio’s monthly subscription box. Subscribers are sent a large, seasonally scented candle (such as woodland pines and tobacco in winter, or peonies and lavender in spring), a gold travel-size candle, and matches. Brooklyn Candle Studio prides itself on being different from other candle brands, since the company uses in-house artisans to hand-wick, pour, and label all of its candles.
Availability:InternationallyCost:Subscriptions are $35 a month.
For the Person Who's Expecting: Motherhood RentalGrowingmaternalbellies call forstretchier clothes, but buying a whole new wardrobe can be costly—which is where Motherhood Rental comes in. This monthly subscription service provides mothers to be with comfy yet stylish outfit options, from brands like Motherhood Maternity and A Pea in the Pod, that are suited for every stage of pregnancy. Each box contains three unique styles—from dresses to leggings and sweaters—that she can choose from without having to worry about taking care of the laundry once she’s done wearing it. Bonus: Shipping is always free, plus there are unlimited box swaps to choose from.
Availability:NationwideCost:A one-month gift subscription is $69; two months is $125; three months is $175.
For the Person With a Well-Stocked Pantry: Best of MouthFor a selection of Mouth's most exciting and mouth-watering items every month, the brand's Best Of Mouth box is the way to go. Featured foods run the gamut from sweet to savory, and there's usually acocktail mixerin there, too. If you're shopping for someone who likes a little bit of everything, they'll love this smattering of small-batch delicacies. There are also boxes that specialize in specific products like pickles,snacks, cocktails, cheese, and hot sauce, for the giftee who knows what they want.
Availability:NationwideCost:Subscriptions start at $60 per month, for either a three-month plan or a month-to-month subscription.
For the Person Who Loves to Spoil Their Pup: BarkBoxBarkBox is an O.G. in the subscription-box world, known for supplyingfurry friendsand their owners with a variety of monthly themed treats, like pork and turkey for Thanksgiving, plus squeaky toys and wearable accessories to keep their dog’s minds active. Whether the dog in question is Chihuahua-size or a big old floofer, all BarkBox plans are the same price, which makes this charming subscription gift especially cost-effective.
Availability:Nationwide and Canada (shipments to Canada will incur an additional $8 fee per shipment)Cost:Gift subscriptions cost $35 for one month; $99 for three months; $156 for six months; $276 for 12 months.
For the Person Who Lives in Athleisure: WantableAs if anactivewear subscription servicefrom brands like Beyond Yoga and Kensie wasn't enough, Wantable's Active subscription offers a more personalized styling and shopping experience than customers may find elsewhere. For every box, users can select up to seven items to ship to their door, then decide which ones to keep and which to return—with charges only for what they keep, on top of a $20 styling fee (and yes, there is a fun personal style quiz to help with item curation). Anyone who basically lives in leggings will surely appreciate a gift card to cover this fee and the clothes they decide to hold onto.
Availability:NationwideCost:Gift cardsstart at $25.
For the Person Who Proudly Calls Themselves Crunchy: CairnGet this adventurous subscription box from Cairn for anyone who regales younger generations with tales of their epic hiking quests each holiday. It contains apparel, snacks,gear, and more from top brands like Black Diamond, Clif, and Hydro Flask. You can choose to surprise them with a quarterly subscription to their Obsidian box, which features a range of outdoor gear, snacks, and emergency essentials, or a multi-month gift that includes six full-size outdoor products. Your recipient can also nicely earn points to use in the Cairn Shop when they submit product reviews.
Availability:NationwideCost:Discover subscriptions cost $35 per month, and quarterly Obsidian boxes cost $250 per quarter.
For the Person Who’s Super Active on Vivino: FirstleafIf you know someone who always has awinerecommendation at the ready, monthly deliveries from Firstleaf Wine Club will keep their taste buds curious and vino knowledge vast. After receiving a Firstleaf gift card, they can elect to receive regular wine club shipments or buy individual bottles through the brand’s online store. Forwine subscription boxes, Firstleaf sends a shipment of different bottles from around the world, including reds, whites, sparklings, and rosés, based on a survey of the recipient’s wine preferences. Your loved one's refined tastes can inform all of their ongoing selections (since their reviews help Firstleaf surface new wines for them), which is great for anyone who’s very opinionated about what they like.
Availability:NationwideCost:Gift cards start at $25.
For the Person Who Is Tired of Streaming YouTube Workouts: Alo MovesThe fitness fanatic in your life will get lots of use out of anAlo Movessubscription, which offers a wide catalog of yoga, meditation, HIIT, Pilates, and barre classes led by well-known instructors like Patrick Beach and Ashley Galvin. With each subscription, they’ll experience a full year of Alo Moves workouts, which they can stream via Apple TV, their iPhone, Android phone, or tablet. If you’re feeling extra giving, you could supplement their gift subscription with somefitness gearand accessories fromAlo Yogato power their next workout.
Availability:InternationallyCost:Gift cards start at $120 for a six-month subscription.
For the Person Who Won't Settle for Sub-Par Coffee: Trade CoffeeTrade Coffee is the perfect gift forcoffee loverslooking to branch out from their go-to roasts. Thecoffee subscription serviceworks with local roasters around the country to offer a variety of flavors to choose from each month, no matter whether they’re into espresso or new roasts fordrip coffee. The recipient can customize the type of coffee they prefer to receive and how often each bag arrives, based on the gifting selection. You can even add a short note to your subscription delivery if you’d like to personalize it a little more.
Availability:NationwideCost:Gift subscriptions start at $40 for two bags.
For the Person Who Marks Their Calendar for the Best of Beauty Awards:AllureBeauty BoxBeauty authorityAllureships out a monthly box containing a bevy of goodies beloved by the site's editors and experts, including makeup and skin-care products from brands like Boscia, First Aid Beauty, and Dr. Jart+. Each box contains at least six items, and at least three of those will be full-size.
Availability:Nationwide, with the exception of U.S. territories, APO, and FPO destinationsCost:A three-month subscription plan costs $65; a six-month plan costs $130; a one-year plan costs $250.
For the Person With Little Ones: KiwiCoKiwiCo provides a range of educational subscription sets primarily geared toward babies and children, but adults can also reap their benefits, too. The sets contain hands-on materials for play and learning based on interests like science, art, and geography. After choosing one of the many unique crates offered by the brand, monthly shipments are delivered to their door with art and design techniques, an illustrated booklet for instruction and inspiration, plus online video tutorials. You can also opt to send a family member a gift card or one-off items from KiwiCo’s online store, including best-sellers, like the brand’sAstronaut Starter Kit.
Availability:NationwideCost:Monthly subscriptions start at $24; Maker Crates and Eureka Crates cost $33 per month; the Panda Crate (which ships every two months) costs $44 per crateFor the Person Who Wants to Upgrade Playtime: LoveveryLovevery’s play kits feature colorful, expert-approved child-development tools like toys,puzzles, and books that are both entertaining and stimulating. There are options to go in with a group, or you can choose to send a family member or friend a gift card to use on a Lovevery subscription or items from its online store, like the brand’s award-winningPlay Gym(which includes removable accessories and five development zones) or 70-pieceBlock Setthat helps children develop spatial awareness. Each Loveveryplay kitis also crafted with eco-friendly materials and includes a carbon-neutral shipping process.
Availability:Nationwide and Canada (shipping charges to Canada include customs and duties)Cost:Gift cards are available from $25 to $500; thePlay Gymis $140; theBlock Setis $90; Play Kits can be gifted for $80 per kit for zero to 12 month-olds or $120 per kit for one-year-olds and up.
For the Person With a Growing Array of Piercings: RowanIf your friend has recently transitioned theirarm partyto theirears, a subscription to Brooklyn-based Rowan will give them plenty of new adornment options to choose from. Each month, Rowan ships to their door a collection of nickel-free,hypoallergenicearringsin either gold vermeil or sterling silver, plus a surprise accessory as a bonus. The service also includes a thoughtful mindfulness card with every shipment, plus an accessory of the month, like an acrylic earring stand, satin travel pouch, journal, or pen. Individual earring sets, bracelets, necklaces, and accessories are also available for purchase through Rowan’s online store.
Availability:NationwideCost:The Monthly Surprise Box costs $29 per month.
For the Person Who Loves Lingerie: AdoreMe EliteKnown for its modern lingerie (and stylish swimsuits), AdoreMe offers alingerie subscription servicethat provides tastefully sexy selects for women sized 30A to 46G. From romantic balconette bras to lovely, lacy one-pieces, any lingerie lover will appreciate unboxing monthly shipments of curated sets.
Availability:NationwideCost:From $40 to $60 per monthFor the Person Who's Getting Into Mixology: Shaker & SpoonAnyone who's tired of making the same old gin and tonic will thrill at the chance to learn new recipes and sample new drinks through Shaker & Spoon's monthlycocktail subscription box. The recipient supplies their own booze, but they'll be covered as far as syrups, bitters, juices, garnishes, and tools go—i.e., all of the special ingredients it would be costly to acquire on their own. To go the extra mile, you can sign the home bartender in your life up forShaker & Spoon's email listso that they'll get a sneak peek of upcoming boxes' contents ahead of delivery.
Availability:NationwideCost:A one-month plan costs $50; three months cost $135; six months cost $250; one year costs $480.
For the Person Who Loves to Spoil Their Kitty: Cat PersonTheCat Person Starter Packwill have any beloved felines licking their chops, since it comes with a two-week supply of grain-free, low-carb meals for cats that pack in protein. Thecat parentin your life will appreciate easier mealtime setups with thispet subscription box, since it includes a bag of dry food, two packs of wet food, and a serve-and-store set. The Starter Box automatically enrolls them in a subscription, which means one less thing they’ll have to worry about each month. If you’d rather gift your favorite cat person an individual item, you can peruse Cat Person’s online shop, which features the brand’s full catalog of wet and dry food (from high-quality salmon and tuna kibble to duck and chicken pâté), plus catnip toys, attractive cat beds, and feeding bowls.
Availability:Nationwide, with the exception of Hawaii, Alaska, military APO, FPO, and DPO destinationsCost:Two weeks' worth of food is $20 (originally $26).
For the Person Who’s Constantly Snacking: Universal YumsIf you know someone whose snack drawer always contains the same three bags of chips, set them up with a Universal Yumssnack subscriptionand watch their palate flourish. Every month, this delicious service ships a selection of goodies (of both the sweet and savory variety) from a different country. Past boxes have featured caraway pretzels from the Czech Republic, bubble tea popcorn from Taiwan, penguin gummies from Colombia, and—we would go on, but we’re getting too hungry.
Availability:Nationwide, plus Canada, Australia, the U.K., and IsraelCost:Boxes containing five to seven snacks start at $15 per box; 10- to 12-snack plans start at $26 per box; 18- to 20-snack plans start at $41 per box.
For the Person Who’d Rather Be Traveling: BokksuShake up their snacks with this uniquesnack subscription boxthat sends seasonal goodies curated from local snack makers in Japan. Treats from theSELF Favebox range from the savory (tiny pickled plum-flavored potato sticks, crunchy edamame crackers) to the sweet (a pear and cheese biscuit, freeze-dried strawberries filled with chocolate, cherry blossom jelly). Plus, if they find a Japanese treat they really love, they can purchase it individually at theBokksu Market.
Availability:International shipping, with someexceptionsCost:Bokksu’s three-month plan is $45 per month; six months is $43 per month; 12 months is $40 per month.
For the Person Who Complains of Dry Hair: ProseFor the friend who still uses two-buck shampoo, treat them to Prose, a subscription box tailored to their specific hair. The company develops formulas for products likeshampoo, conditioner,hair masks, and more to help their hair thrive, and their name is even printed on the label.
Available:NationwideCost:The Essentials gift set costs $56; the Complete Set gift set costs $98.
For the Person Who’s Always Sharply Dressed:GQBest Stuff BoxIt can feel nearly impossible to shop for the people in your life who naturally keep abreast of trends, butGQ’s quarterly subscription box is probably your best bet at wowing them. Each box contains a highly curated selection ofGQeditors’ favorite electronics, grooming items, clothes, accessories, and more, plus exclusive offers and discounts on services like HBO Max.
Availability:Nationwide, with the exception of U.S. territories, APO, and FPO destinationsCost:A six-month plan of two quarterly boxes costs $100, while a one-year plan of four quarterly boxes costs $190.
For the Person Who Should Consider Moonlighting as a DJ: Vinyl Me PleaseSet up the new or seasonedvinyl collectorsin your life with a Vinyl Me Please subscription service, which features four music genres, depending on their tastes: classics (soul, blues, and jazz records), essentials (records from different genres), rap and hip-hop (includes both old- and new-school sounds), or country.
Each subscription box also includes fun extras, like album listening notes, custom cocktail recipes, and street-art stencils. Vinyl Me Please’s collection of music includes well-known artists like Stevie Nicks, Outkast, Queens of the Stone Age, Herbie Hancock, and more. And if you want to hand-select a few records instead of an ongoing subscription, the brand also offers groovy single-purchase albums through its online store.
Availability:InternationallyCost:A three-month gift subscription is $119; six months is $219; an annual subscription is $399.
For the Person Who Loves Their Member Station: NPR Coffee ClubIf they’ve listened to just about everyLife Kitepisode and bookmark everyTiny Deskappearance, a gift subscription to NPR’s Coffee Club might already be on their wish list. NPR’s Coffee Club consists of whole-bean roasts from Counter Culture Coffee, which is based in Durham, North Carolina, that are named after NPR’s iconic shows and podcasts, like All Beans Considered, and, of course, Tiny Desk Coffee. You can choose to gift a single 12-ounce bag ofcoffee, or up to four bags, each week or once a month. Coffee subscriptions are freshly roasted, and ship out the next business day after an order is placed.
Availability:NationwideCost:Gift subscriptions start at $17.
For the Person Who Doesn’t Drink: Acid League Wine Proxies ClubThose who aren’t particularly fond ofwineor liquor will appreciate being gifted with a membership to Acid League’s Wine Proxies Club. The brand’s Wine Proxies are zero-proof blends of juices, teas, spices, and bitters that each have a similar depth and complexity to a great bottle of wine. Like your loved one's favorite red or white, they’re designed to pair well with food, and to be enjoyed in actual wine glasses.
Each month, Acid League sends a selection of three new Wine Proxies straight to a family member’s doorstep, featuring flavors like Blanc Slate (which tastes bright, grassy, similar to sauvignon blanc), Cuvée Zero (including berry and pomegranate notes, similar to a pinot noir), and Zest Contact (including citrus flavors like blood orange, plus black tea and pepper).
Availability:Nationwide, plus CanadaCost:The club costs $60 per month.
SELF does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Any information published on this website or by this brand is not intended as a substitute for medical advice, and you should not take any action before consulting with a healthcare professional.
More from SelfContact© 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of ourUser AgreementandPrivacy Policy and Cookie StatementandYour California Privacy Rights.
SELFmay earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
Ad Choices
