old id = 3792
52 Cooking Gifts for Your Favorite Home Cook in 2021 | SELF
2022
https://www.self.com/gallery/cooking-gifts-for-home-cooks

52 Cooking Gifts for Your Favorite Home CookByAudrey BrunoIf you don’t cook a lot, it can be hard to know what cookinggiftsto get your friends who do. You might think a set of measuring cups would be nice, but the home cook in your life probably already has at least one of those (and maybe even more). Finding out what cookware they want isn’t as easy as walking into aSur La Table. Sure, everything there looks fun, cute, and potentially useful, but there’s so much that it can feel impossible to tell what they’d appreciate and what they’d probably regift.
That’s where I come in. As a home cook who often writes about home cooking, I always have my finger on the pulse of what’s hot and what’s not in thekitchen gadget industry. I know just which products will actually be helpful in the kitchen, and which are simply one-trick ponies that’ll take up your cabinet space.
So if you’re wondering what to get your favorite home cook, look no further than these gift ideas, from kitchen gadgets to helpfuldo-it-all tools. These cooking gifts will solve a lot of problems—whether that’s nonstop grease splatter or never having a lid that’s the right size—and they’ll seriously impress the chef on your list. Just remember to get your holiday shopping done early—experts are forecasting shipping delays, early deadlines, and supply chain issues so don’t leave this year’s gift list to the last minute.
All products featured on SELF are independently selected by our editors. However, when you buy something through our retail links, we may earn an affiliate commission.
Five Two Ultimate Carbon Steel WokThis multifunctional wok has a lot going for it. Crafted with carbon steel, it’s as good at maintaining even temperatures as cast iron but much more lightweight. And it’s equipped with a couple of ingenious add-ons, like a tempura rack that doubles as a steamer and a glass lid that fits snuggly, even with the rack in place.
Lenox Luna Nesting Dinnerware SetEvery home cook knows just how important it is to get their mise en place before getting started. Having everything pre-measured and ready to go in little bowls just makes the process so much smoother and simpler. These bowls are ideal for that purpose, as well as stylish and easy to store—so your giftee doesn’t have to worry about digging through their cabinets for the right amount of small bowls all the time.
Chef iQ Smart CookerThis appliance can do everything that an Instant Pot can do and more. With over 300 different cooking presets, it’s a pressure cooker that’s also capable of slow cooking, Bluetooth accessible, and equipped with a cooking calculator that helps determine the exact cook time for a certain portion of food. The home cook in your life will love that they can start the cooking process straight from their phone.
W&P The Popper Microwave BowlThis microwave-friendly bowl is the best way to get movie-theater-quality popcorn with the least amount of work. Collapsible and easy to store, this smartly designed bowl is also a great waste reducer. No kernel will go unpopped, and your loved one will never have to toss an empty bag of microwave popcorn in the trash again.
"Black Food: Stories, Art, and Recipes from Across the African Diaspora" by Bryant TerryThe latest title from Bryant Terry explores the many flavors and experiences of the African diaspora by marrying original poetry and essays from over 100 Black thought leaders to their cultural recipes. You can expect both fresh and original takes on classics like skillet cakes, sweet potato pie, and jerk chicken from beloved Black chefs like Yewande Komolafe, Jenné Claiborne, and Suzanne Barr.
Poketo Colorama Deep DishAvailable in multiple colors and sizes, this hot pink baking dish is just one of Poketo’s many fun and different ways to spice up your cookware. Along with being dishwasher- and microwave- safe, its stain-proof enamel coating can handle a turn on the grill or even over a campfire and look good while doing it.
Cast Iron Garlic RoasterRoasting a whole head of garlic is a great way to make your house smell delicious and have a quick and delicious condiment on hand at all times. This cute and practical cast-iron gadget eliminates the need for the aluminum foil that’s usually involved in the garlic roasting process. And, because you’ll only ever use it to roast whole heads of garlic, it almost never needs to be cleaned.
MoMA Bubble Sauce PotFor the home cook that seems to already have every pot and pan under the sun, this eccentric saucer will be the cherry on top of their collection. The vintage Italian design is both vibrant and functional, with unique rounded features that are easy to handle and nonstick, anti-scratch coating that can safely be used on both gas and electric cooktops.
Ooni Koda 12 Gas Powered Pizza OvenMaking homemade pizza with a standard oven is a recipe for disappointment because most options don’t have enough heat power to achieve restaurant-quality pie. But this oven can reach temperatures of up to 950 degrees F, and is small enough to fit in just about any outdoor space. With this sleek appliance, your loved one will be able to whip up piping hot pizza whenever the feeling strikes.
Yamako Tofu Maker KitThis fully equipped kit has all the tools your loved one needs to get into tofu making, including a cheese cloth, molding kit, and a quick guide to introduce them to the process. Pair it with a big bag of soybeans to ensure they have everything they need to get started and watch the freshly made tofu flow.
Takada Hand-Knit Pot Stand SetTrivets and pot stands are one thing that home cooks and frequent dinner party hosts can never have enough of. This hand-knit set includes various sizes and is both strong enough to handle the heaviest hot pots and stylish enough to impress the best—something the host in your life will definitely appreciate.
Sqwishful Plastic-Free Scrub Sponge SetMade from the loofah plant, these sponges are naturally rough and tough enough to remove even the most stuck-on bits of food. And they can be tossed straight into the compost when they’re no longer usable because they don’t contain any plastic! Talk about a great eco-friendly stocking stuffer.
Aplat Large Reusable & Biodegradable Pan CoverEvery home cook is familiar with the pang of guilt that comes from ripping off yet another piece of plastic wrap or aluminum foil. While beeswax wrap is a good alternative a lot of the time, it can be hard to find sheets that are large enough to cover big dishes like casseroles and sheet cakes. But this reusable pan cover definitely is, along with being easy to care for and biodegradable after many uses.
Anyday The Everyday SetMicrowave cooking is having a moment because it’s quick, hands off, and ideal for busy times. That your food might be unevenly cooked is the only drawback, but this set of dishes is on a mission to prove that doesn’t have to be the case. Featuring a variety of sizes—each best suited to a different task—these dishes rely on secure glass lids to steam cook everything from soup to banana bread to perfection.
Spicewalla Kitchen Essentials CollectionThis pack of 18 essential spices is the perfect gift to give the person in your life who’s interested in becoming a better cook. Featuring ingredients like cumin seeds, mustard powder, and whole cloves, they’ll have a lot of what they need to start cooking outside their comfort zone. Packaged in brightly colored, stackable tins, these are spices they’ll be happy to put on display (and more likely to use it they’re easily visible).
Philips Automatic Pasta Maker PlusThough pasta making is normally a very involved process, this hands-free gadget does all the hard work of mixing, kneading, and extruding for you. Simply add flour and liquid, pick from one of four shaping discs, and let the machine do its thing. Who wouldn’t want to be able to make homemade penne, spaghetti, fettuccine, or lasagna on a moment’s notice?Oxo Good Grips Good Gravy Fat SeparatorThis gadget might be intended for gravy, but its uses extend far beyond that. Home cooks will quickly realize that it’s great for everything from infusing olive oil to making ghee from scratch. Basically, it’ll come in handy in any cooking task that involves separating fat from liquid.
Alabama Sawyer Upcycled Countertop Compost BinMade from fallen trees, this compost bin is a stylish and eco-friendly place to toss your kitchen scraps. It’s also easy to move around from one working station to the next, and fitted with a lightweight, removable tin that makes the cleaning process relatively breezy.
Omsom Heat Lover's SetOmsom is beloved by home cooks for the way that it sources ingredients from all over the globe to deliver authentic East and Southeast Asian sauces. This heat-packed gift set will take any hot-sauce-loving home chef to nirvana with a sampling of 13 of the brand's spiciest flavors, including Thai larb, Korean bulgogi, and Chinese mala salad, to name a few. Each packet equals two servings.
Caraway Oven MittsOven mitts see a lot of action in the kitchen and many aren’t strong enough to stand the test of time—and all the splashes and stains they’re bound to accumulate. Home cooks will appreciate receiving these mitts because they’re protected by a double layer of stain-resistant weave stitching. And they’re cute to boot.
Lamson Fish Turner with Walnut HandleTraditional spatulas are clunky and often too wide for the purposes of most home cooks, especially when it comes to delicate recipes like crepes and fried eggs. But this slender, sleek fish turner is the best tool for just about any turning job (even if its name would suggest otherwise). Plus, a sturdy walnut handle makes it especially easy to grasp and maneuver.
Silpat Perfect Cookie Baking MatIf the home cook in your life has expressed an interest in becoming more eco-friendly, this is a great gift to help them do it. Silpat nonstick mats are long-lasting, extremely versatile, and will entirely eliminate the need for parchment and baking paper. They can be used to line sheet pans for anything from savory meals to sugary treats, and this one is marked with measurements to help your foodie friend get the perfect size for whatever they’re cooking every time.
TofuXpress Tofu PressFrequent tofu eaters know what a pain it is to squeeze and drain a slab of tofu—an undertaking that normally requires a fair bit of paper towel. This tofu press is designed with a spring system that removes any and all liquid without the need for any paper (so eco-friendly!) or excessive physical effort.
Cast-Iron Tortilla PressIf your loved one is trying (and failing) to flatten corn tortillas with a rolling pin, then this might be the perfect gift. Using a tortilla press is just about the only way to achieve those superthin, super-authentic results. Sure, it may be a single-use tool, but it’s the only one that can get this specific job done. That’s why it’s great that when not in use, this stylish, cast-iron option will serve as an excellent countertop decorative element to any kitchen.
"The Korean Vegan Cookbook" by Joanne Lee MolinaroAfter dominating TikTok with tantalizing recipes that reimagine Korean food for a vegan audience, Joanne Lee Molinaro has debuted a cookbook just in time for the holiday season. Filled with recipes that highlight plant-based ingredients like gochujang and dashima—and the family stories and childhood memories that inspired them—even your favorite TikTok-averse home chef is sure to love it.
Bristle-Free Grill BrushAnyone who's ever tried to clean a grill knows just how difficult it can be. But this tool is designed to make the process relatively quick and hands-off by using a two-spring system to remove BBQ remains without any blood, sweat, or tears. No longer will your loved one need to worry about their hands getting scratched while scrubbing, or that little bits of metal might be falling through the cracks and contaminating future food. This is a gift frequent grillers will be happy to receive.
Anthropologie Baking Spirits Bright Sheet PanThis brightly colored baking sheet is great for small jobs, like baking only a few cookies or a single-serving sheet pan dinner. And its vibrant pink hue sets it apart from the standard stainless steel fare. Home cooks will love that it makes their baked goods even more photogenic.
Yamazaki Cookbook StandA stand like this is essential in the kitchen if you want to avoid accidental spills all over your favorite cookbooks (and technology). Home cooks will appreciate that it’s basically weightless and has an adaptable shelf to suit bulky books and thin tablets alike.
The Ringer Cast-Iron CleanerCleaning a cast-iron skillet is a hassle, and one that many are never quite sure how to do correctly. This chain-mail tool cuts through the confusion by removing even the most stuck-on bits without damaging the pan’s seasoning or enamel.
The DÅ Brand Mortar & PestleCrafted with local materials in Nigeria, this hand-carved and hand-painted artisan mortar and pestle is both stylish and functional. It can handle even the messiest jobs like grinding pesto or emulsifying aioli and look good while doing it.
Ekobo Mixing Bowl & Colander SetIt’s never entirely clear where you’re supposed to place a still-dripping colander after draining something. After all, no one really wants to place their freshly cooked pasta in a germ-ridden sink. This minimalist bowl and colander set solves that problem and more. Your giftee can also use it to reserve water from washing fruits and vegetables for watering their houseplants.
Diaspora Co. Build Your Own Masala DabbaA masala dabba is the iconic round, stainless steel tin that’s a mainstay in South Asian kitchens. This customizable option from Diaspora Co. let’s you choose from the brand's huge range of regional herbs and spices, so you can build a sampler blend that’s classic or unexpected.
Pineapple Collaborative Olive Oil and Vinegar SetA nice bottle of olive oil and vinegar is the crème de la crème of gifts for home cooks—you’ll always be able to use it, and you can never really get enough of these pantry staples. It’s a great option for those foodie friends and family who already have every kitchen tool and gadget.
Material Kitchen The reBoardThese colorful cutting boards are so chic, you’d never guess that they’re made entirely from recycled plastic. Plastic kitchen scraps and renewable sugarcane come together to create a surface that’s as aesthetically pleasing as it is durable and sustainable.
East Fork Weeknight Serving BowlHome cooks and dinner party hosts can never have enough serving bowls. This one from East Board is the perfect size for everything from a party-size batch of homemade chips to a family-style spaghetti dinner. Plus, it’s hand-crafted and dishwasher- and microwave-safe, making for extra easy prep and cleanup both pre- and post-celebration. It’s a holiday gift miracle.
Smithey Ironware Co. Carbon Steel Oval RoasterThis rustic, hand-hammered roasting pan doubles as both a baking sheet and a serving tray. Made from carbon steel, it’s lightweight and easy to handle but strong enough to carry the weight of heavy chicken or roast beef. And home cooks will love that they can take it straight from the oven to the dinner table—less dishwashing to deal with later on!Eva Solo Herb ChopperThe curved blade on this little gadget is designed to make the process of chopping herbs more contained and efficient—as well as far less messy and a bit more fun. But it’s not just great for herbs. Home cooks will quickly find that it’s ideal for everything from chopping chocolate without it getting all over their hands to making a smooth and flavorful homemade garlic paste.
"New Native Kitchen: Celebrating Modern Recipes of the American Indian" by Freddie Bitsoie & James O. FraioliFredde Bitsoie, former chef of Native Foods Cafe at the Smithsonian’s National Museum of the American Indian, celebrates Indigenous cuisine from all corners of North America in this long-awaited cookbook. Recipes like Cherrystone clam soup from the Northeastern Wampanoag and spice-rubbed pork tenderloin from the Pueblo are paired with striking art and storytelling in order to paint a vivid picture of both historical and modern-day Native American cuisine.
Pampered Chef Food ChopperThisgadgetis great for when home cooks need to quickly chop something but don’t feel like doing it by hand. You just put everything in, press down on the handle a couple of times, and just like that, everything is chopped.
Five Two Airtight Silicone LidsAsk any home cook and they’ll tell you that keeping track of lids is hard work. Not these ones, though. In addition to being really cute, they’re also really helpful, and they’re easier to store since they lie flat. Sold in a pack of five different sizes, they’re airtight and can be used on anything from sauce pots to Tupperware.
Food52 Five Two Essential KnivesThese newknivesare the talk of the town, and for good reason. Food52 designed them based on what over 4,000 members told them that they wanted in a knife. The resulting product is sleek, stylish, and sharp—and at $49 a piece or $139 for all three, they’re a steal for something made with Japanese steel.
Chef’s Planet Clip & DrainGive your home cook a reason to finally throw out that bulky colander they only use for pasta. This gadget clips right onto the side of a pot and works like a charm.
NoCry Cut Resistant GlovesIf your home cook is also a bit clumsy, they will be eternally grateful if you give them these for preventing any accidental nicks.
Breville Gun Smoke InfuserA favorite of Angie Mar, executive chef atThe Beatrice Innin NYC, this little guy will give anyone the ability to impart a smoky, eight-hours-on-the-barbecue flavor to just about anything in a fraction of the time. Suggest your giftee use it on something classic, like a steak or pork roast, or something surprising (smoked nuts, anyone?).
Bread Warming BlanketThink of this as ahot-water bottle, but for your bread. It keeps fresh bread warm and not-so-fresh bread from becoming stale with a removable flaxseed-filled pack that can be heated up in the microwave—perfect for anyone keen on tackling abread-making project.
Jonathan Simons Lazy Wood SpoonThose of us who cook and are not wise enough to invest in a spoon rest would adore a gift as thoughtful as this. So if you’ve been eyeing a spoon rest for a certain someone, scrap that and get them this instead. It’ll save them cleanup time and stress in the end.
Souper CubesIf you’ve ever had to freeze a large amount of something at once, you’ve probably realized that plastic baggies are ill-equipped to do the job, and that your run-of-the-mill ice tray is way too small to get it done. Home cooks prep andfreeze big quantitiesof everything from pre-batched cocktails to homemade stockall the time, so they’ll definitely be appreciative if you get them a set of these.
Stainless Steel PrepTaxiIn every home cook’s life, there comes a moment when they do not know how the hell they’re going to get something from one place to the next. That’s where this little gadget comes in. They can use it to scrape up whatever they’ve been preparing and safely transfer it elsewhere without worrying that it’ll fall onto the floor.
Saltverk Sustainable Sea SaltEvery home cook needs a fabulous finishing salt on hand, but how many times can you buy them thesame old Maldon? Switch it up with this Icelandic sea salt, which includes varieties like lava and licorice. Just a pinch will be enough to give their food a Nordic flare.
Click & Grow Smart Garden 3 Self-Watering Indoor GardenNothing can take a meal from flat to flavorful faster than a handful of freshly picked herbs, but keeping herbs alive is an uphill battle—it seems like they need to be watered constantly. This electricindoor herb gardenwaters itself so the home cook in your life doesn’t have to.
Anova Sous Vide Precision CookerA sous vide is the kind ofkitchen toolthat home cooks dream of owning. It cooks food perfectly with minimal involvement—you can even control it with an app on your phone! If you want to make dreams come true this holiday season, this gift is the way to go.
Andrée Jardin Copper ScrubberThis stylish scrubber is not your average steel wool. It’s strong enough to remove even the most stuck-on gunk and gentle enough to handle glass andhigh-grade steel. Oh, and it’s French! Talk about a great stocking stuffer.
SELF does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Any information published on this website or by this brand is not intended as a substitute for medical advice, and you should not take any action before consulting with a healthcare professional.
More from SelfContact© 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of ourUser AgreementandPrivacy Policy and Cookie StatementandYour California Privacy Rights.
SELFmay earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
Ad Choices
