old id = 3810
WIRED's 2021 Wish List: 31 Amazing Gifts for the Best People in Your Life | WIRED
2022
https://www.wired.com/gallery/wish-list-2021-stimulating-gifts

To revisit this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
To revisit this article, select My Account, thenView saved storiesGear TeamWish List 2021: 31 Stimulating Gifts for All the Best People in Your LifeThe WIRED Reviewsteam spends all year testing out the latest fleet of gadgets. We rideebikes, break a sweat withworkout headphones, and drink alotofcoffeeto help you decide how to spend your money.
Every year, a handful of those gizmos stand out to us. They strike us as things that would make excellent gifts—not only because they're particularly innovative or supremely well-designed (though those might be true). We choose them because there's something about them that's just delightful to use. And in another year that's perhaps left us more frayed at the edges than we'd like, a joyful gift goes far. We hope our Wish List helps you find the perfect one.
Special offer for Gear readers: Get a1-year subscription toWIREDfor $5 ($25 off). This includes unlimited access toWIRED.
com and our print magazine (if you'd like). Subscriptions help fund the work we do every day.
Be sure to check out our many othergift guides, including the bestsubscription boxes,analog gifts, andgifts under $25.
If you buy something using links in our stories, we may earn a commission. This helps support our journalism.
Learn more. Please also considersubscribing to WIREDPlayer's ChoiceLG’s C1 is a gorgeous TV that doubles as a video game monitor. Support for PC gaming’s latest variable refresh formats—Nvidia G-Sync and AMD Freesync—keep frame rates matched for smoother animations, and OLED (organic LED) technology means each pixel acts as its own backlight for perfect contrast. Add in speedy input response (the time it takes your commands to show up onscreen) and gorgeous color accuracy, and you get our favorite high-end TV of 2021.
Enjoy the SilenceThese kid-specific Bluetooth headphones with active noise-canceling can helpyoung onesfocus through all kinds of ruckus. A comfortable fit (for ages 3 and up) and 23 hours of battery life (with noise-canceling on) will cocoon them in their own worlds for as long as they like—or their parents allow. A limiter keeps max volume to a safe 85 decibels, ensuring that your budding death metal fan won’t blow out their eardrums quite yet. Who knows, maybe if it’s quiet for them, they’ll be quiet for you.
Power TrioThis bundle from legendary instrument maker Moog Music is a short stack of analog synthesizers—the melodic Mother 32, the polyrhythmic Subharmonicon sequencer, and theDrummer From Another Motherpercussion unit—that can produce all the bleeps, wooshes, thumps, and bloops you could ever need. Use the included colorful patch cables to route the sound between the three machines and expand the sonic palette to infinity and beyond.
Position PlayerBang & Olufsen’s wood-grilled Level isn’t just an exemplar of stately Danish design. The Wi-Fi-connected speaker also sports some innovative audio tricks. Its sound signature auto-adjusts based on its orientation: Laying it flat emphasizes the bass, while standing it upright gives the music more brilliant detail. Grab the handle built into the aluminum frame to tote the jams from room to room, and when the 16-hour battery is drained, slot the Level into its wall bracket ($119), where it can charge up while the party keeps rocking.
Minute DetailsThe stuffing, the pie, the green bean casserole. How to keep track of so many different cook times? You could juggle multiple timers on your phone, but you’re better off keeping that thing in your pants and using a dedicated device instead. Oxo’s 4-inch wedge has three 100-hour timers, each with its own distinct alarm, all programmable on the angled keypad. And unlike your precious touchscreen, this count-downer doesn’t care how buttery your fingers are.
Goodie BagThere are so many reasons to lovewaist packs. They’re unisex, hands-free, and just big enough to carry the essentials. This new puny pack from Osprey—a company known for its rugged camping and hiking packs—is made from eco-friendly recycled polyester and is treated with durable water repellent. It keeps your mask, lunch, sunglasses, and vaccine card safe and dry while you navigate the forest, the concrete jungle, or the airport security line.
Gold SealYou’ve probably struggled to findearbudsthat fit. Ultimate Ears has solved this problem witha clever pair of wireless earbudsthat mold their tips to your ear canals. When you first get them, stick them in your ears, then run a quick setup in the companion app. The earbuds glow blue and warm up, then the soft tips mold to a perfect fit in about a minute. The great seal means awesome bass response, and the custom fit means you’ll worry less about losing a bud. You’ll get eight hours of listening between trips to the included charging case.
Reduced ImpactFamous for turning truck tarps into stylish satchels, Freitag aims its sustainability-minded design philosophy at a new castaway: surplus automotive airbags. This upcycled backpack is heavy-duty enough to haul a day’s worth of schoolbooks and malleable enough to stow in its own internal pouch. Freitag produces the bags from various stock sources, so each one is unique.
Twitch EyeThe newly updated version of Razer’s exemplary webcam does away with the original Kiyo’s integrated ring light—and that’s a good thing. In our experience, you can dial in your Twitch stream illumination better by positioning stand-alone lights around your desk. Also, Razer’s Synapse app lets you adjust the image to best suit your particular lighting situation. (Sorry, Mac-heads, some image controls are PC-only right now.) Choose between 1080p at 30 fps and 720p at 60 fps.
Fully LoadedAn electric bike isn’t a complete car substitute until it can carry a week’s worth of groceries, in the rain, at night. Cannondale’s Adventure Neo 3 EQ (whew!) is a stylish, sturdy step-through bike that comes with all the essential accessories built in: front and rear lights, fenders, and a rear rack for attaching grocery panniers or a laptop bag. The powerful and reliable Bosch powertrain has a 65-mile range, and multiple suspension points make for a smooth ride.
Color CodedThis trippy jigsaw puzzle comes from the mind of master brainteaser Chris Yates, but the true credit goes to an algorithm. Generative software plots the layout of the pieces, a process that ensures no two puzzles are alike. The squiggly outline of each piece is digitally painted in one of five far-out color schemes (like Sugary Breakfast Cereal, shown here) onto maple plywood, which is then sliced. Each blob is its own mini puzzle, and all the blobs join to form an 8 x 8-inch bubblescape.
Retro FabulousPhotography enthusiasts on your list will appreciate the dreamy, grainy, filmlike images produced by the 13-megapixel Paper Shoot, without the headache and cost of analog film. A switch on the back flips between color settings: standard, black-and-white, sepia, and a blue tint. Hook it up to a battery pack and take a time-lapse shot or a 10-second, 1080p video. The tough case is made of pressed-stone “paper” that feels like card stock, and the entire thing is just half an inch thick. When you’re ready to expand the visual possibilities, there are add-on lenses available ($25).
GroundskeeperFor lovers of pour-over coffee, this dripper is a superior way to make one cup at a time. The handleless design ensures you don’t bump the spout of your gooseneck kettle while dosing the grounds with hot water. The Japanese-made ceramic cone retains heat better than glass or plastic, and its small drain hole slows the flow out of the bottom of the paper filter for a more controlled extraction. Use thewooden collar($14) to fit the brewer over receptacles of any size—like Umami Mart’sseamless mixing glass($58, shown).
Views MasterSony’s ZV-1 mirrorless compact camera is perfect for the budding YouTube influencer who’s ready to level up from their phone. The 20-megapixel shooter has a directional microphone, the ability to shoot 4K video at up to 30 frames per second, and a fully articulating touchscreen that helps you center your mug in the shot. Its 24–70 mm f/1.8–2.8 lens is versatile enough to capture the whole scene or zoom in on your expressive face for total viral domination.
Clean SlateApple finally refreshed itsiPad Mini, and the newly redesigned powerhouse has shot straight to the top of our list. With the company’s latest custom processor inside, it’s a smooth performer. The larger (8.3-inch), sharper display is perfect for streaming Netflix, and since the Touch ID sensor has moved to the power button on the top, the Home button has been eliminated for a cleaner look. Tack on the second-gen Apple Pencil ($129) and you’ve got a trusty sketchpad too.
Go the DistanceSee those loopy nubs on the soles of these shoes? Those are an On Running signature—they show up in different configurations on all of the Swiss brand’s kicks—providing extra cushion for runners who need it, absorbing impacts, and helping prevent injuries. Those bouncy bulbs are a welcome buffer for a 10K Turkey Trot or a stroll down the block for a turkey sandwich.
Step It UpUnless you’re a professional ultramarathoner, you might never use the most advanced features on top-of-the-line fitness trackers. For those of us who are active but just need some gentle nudging, a Fitbit is a better choice. The new Charge 5 has features that are normally found only on pricier wearables: GPS, blood oxygen and cardiac measurements, and sleep tracking that can wake you up when your body is most ready to greet the day. Most importantly, Fitbit’s software is simple to use—because a fitness tracker shouldn’t be another source of stress.
Pyramid SchemeTrue puzzle people know that cubes are for squares. This perplexing pyramid, finished in brushed satin or matte black, is an eye-catching trifecta that’s equal parts art piece, fidget spinner, and paperweight. Pulling apart the four identical steel pieces is easy enough, but slotting them back together requires a dextrous mind and the fleetest of fingers. It looks truly beautiful sitting on your desk—provided you have the patience to assemble it properly.
Material GirlAllbirds is known for textile innovation in footwear, and its debut line of performance apparel keeps that streak going. The women’s Natural Leggings are made from a soft and durable combination of eucalyptus fiber, merino wool, and recycled nylon. The snugly fitting material is moisture-wicking and slightly compressive. It’s also silky smooth, yet feels substantial to the touch. There’s a pocket on the hip for stashing a phone, and a drawstring keeps the leggings from sliding down mid-workout.
Tech SupportGot an iPhone 12 or 13? The MagSafe-enabled handset will stick to the magnets embedded in Joby’s tripod mount, which helps keep your phone upright for TikTok shoots or on-the-fly Zoom meetings. If you don’t trust the magnets, there are also clamps for extra security. The mount is paired with Joby’s GorillaPod, featuring contorting legs that can be wrapped around fences, poles, or tree branches. Need more options? The MagSafe head has a screw mount that’s compatible with nearly any tripod.
BibliophileAmazon’s latest mid-range Kindle is a nearly perfect single-use device—the pocketable ereader holds enough books to fill a home library.
The updated Paperwhitehas a larger, 6.8-inch screen, a faster page-turning system, and an adjustable backlight that can switch between bright white and a warmer amber color for bedtime. The stunning 10 weeks of battery life and fast USB-C charging (finally!) make this Kindle the best way to feed your head.
Candela HolderModeled on the rippled look of paper lanterns, this multifunctional lamp is a collab between the design firm Silvon and the illuminati at Gantri. A dish built into the top is shaped to hold all of your pocketables—keys, coins, sunglasses, lip balm. A dimmer switch on the cord controls the diffused LED light. Like Gantri’s other lamps, the Tray is 3D-printed from plant-based plastics. Elegant, eco-friendly, and useful.
Sit TightThis easy-to-assemble desk chair from Branch is a rare bird: It’s comfortable and won’t make a huge dent in your WFH stipend. The mesh back lets heat flow away from your body instead of getting trapped next to your skin. The high-density foam seat is firm yet soft, and the seven points of adjustment are plentiful enough to make typing and Zooming for hours not torture.
Student AssemblyLego’s latest educational set offers a playful approach to learning STEAM topics with a mix of problem-solving, storytelling, and hands-on building. Kids can work their way through 40 lessons, using 449 bricks and a simple motor to build rolling robots, spinning Ferris wheels, and other kinetic machines. The lessons play out on a mobile app, and kids tap through at their own pace. The kit is designed for grades 1 through 5.
Floor MonitorEven after dozens of competitors hit the market, iRobot’s Roombas remain the most effective robot vacuums, with the best navigation systems and functionality. The latest model is equipped with machine intelligence to learn room layouts, smartly schedule cleanings, and even avoid cables and pet poop. It also has a smaller, easier-to-hide docking station where the robot relieves itself at the end of each shift.
Three-FacedGaze upon yourself through a smarter looking glass. Simplehuman’s makeup mirror offers three levels of magnification—1X and 10X on one side and 5X on the other. A sensor switches on the front ring light when it detects an approaching face. Double-tap the rim to make the 10-inch mirror auto-flip between its two sides. Two illumination settings simulate the color tone of either natural sunlight or a softer candlelight. Adjust the brightness by running a finger across the mirror’s bottom edge.
Triple PlayMicrosoft’s crew of experimental hardware designers made another winner.
The Surface Laptop Studio’s unique chassis bridges the laptop-tablet gap. Its hinge allows the bottom of the screen to pivot toward the trackpad into “tent” mode (shown) or lay flat for a tablet-like experience. Amazingly, it’s great in all three configurations: for typing, watchingSquid Game, or doing creative work with the Surface Pen ($89). It’s plenty powerful too, whether you’re editing video or sketching your masterpiece.
Hairway to HeavenIn goes wet curly hair, out comes dry straight hair. RevAir’s vacuum-like wand pulls air (and hair) downward to dry your locks, a method that gently stretches out waves and curls without causing frizziness. Additional openings at the top of the suction wand dry the roots. For those with curls to tame, it cuts the entire styling process in half and sidesteps the damaging effects of, say, clamping your hair between hot metal plates.
Need for SwedeVolvo’s all-electric five-door has a range of 230 miles—decent for a family-sized SUV and plenty of juice to get around the city or out of town. Performance is better than you’d expect from such a classy chassis, with boundless acceleration and deft handling. Also impressive is the tight Android Automotive integration. Use the dashboard touchscreen or voice controls to map a route, handle incoming texts and calls, or just ask Google Assistant to recite trivia while you inch through traffic.
HeadlightsGo ahead, ride your bike or scooter late into the night. As long as you have Nutcase’s latest skullcase, you’ll have 360-degree illumination to highlight your presence to drivers, pedestrians, and anyone else sharing the road. The helmet, which features brain-protecting MIPS tech, has a 200-lumen LED embedded in the front, plus strips of 65-lumen LEDs along the sides (amber) and on the back (red). The power button toggles the lights between pulse, steady glow, and off. The USB-rechargeable beacons burn for up to three hours.
Lead RollPress the red button and hold on tight: The Apollo Ghost e-scooter can quickly ratchet past 30 mph—good thing the hydraulic brakes are very effective. Its dual 800-watt motors crush steep hills as they power the 64-pound machine over 20 miles of urban blacktop between charges. There’s a roomy deck for bigfoots, its lights make it hard to miss on nighttime joyrides, and it folds down for easy storage in tiny city closets.
Contributors:Boone Ashworth,Michael Calore,Julian Chokkattu,Scott Gilbertson,Medea Giordano,Parker Hall,Matt Jancer,Taka Mark Kasuya,Adrienne So,Brenda StolyarThis article appears in the December 2021/January 2022 issue.
Subscribe now.
Sign up for theGadget Lab newsletterand never buy the wrong thing again.
Get more tech news with ourGadget Lab podcast, available onApple PodcastsandSpotify.
WIRED COUPONSExtra 20% off sitewide - Dyson promo code 2022GoPro Hot Deal: $150 off the new HERO10 Black BonesSamsung coupon - 45% off select items + free shippingExtra $100 off XPS & Inspiron laptops, desktops & 2 in 1s with Dell coupon codeDeal of the Day: 1-day flash sale for 20% off electronics & appliancesAT&T Internet promo code - $50 reward with AT&T Fiber orderMore From WIREDContact© 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of ourUser AgreementandPrivacy Policy and Cookie StatementandYour California Privacy Rights.
Wiredmay earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
Ad Choices
