old id = 3817
5 Best Gaming PCs We've Reviewed (2022): Dell, MSI, Origin, and More | WIRED
2022
https://www.wired.com/gallery/best-gaming-desktop-pcs

To revisit this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
To revisit this article, select My Account, thenView saved storiesJaina GreyEric RavenscraftThe Best Desktop Gaming PCsConsoles like theNintendo SwitchorPlayStation 5may be great for gaming, but they'rehard to come by. Fortunately, a good old fashioned gaming PC is always an option. If you want to get access to the massive library of games on stores like Steam and Epic, we've got some of the best gaming PCs collected here.
Since gaming desktops can be upgraded more frequently than consoles, they can deliver high-fidelity visuals unrivaled by most other systems. Paired with the right peripherals—aquick and responsive mouse,a mechanical keyboard, anda good headset—a gaming PC can quickly become the place you spend most of your free time.
Choosing a gaming desktop can be incredibly complex, though. There are several specs and factors to consider, including specs, what kinds of games you're going to play, and how many thousand RGB lights you want on it.
Building your own PCis also a great option if you want to make it yourself and upgrade it over time, but for everyone else, these are the best gaming desktops we've tested at WIRED.
Updated November 2021: We’ve removed the HP Omen and Dell G5 desktops because those models have been discontinued. We also added the NZXT BLD custom build system.
Special offer for Gear readers: Get a1-year subscription to WIRED for $5 ($25 off). This includes unlimited access to WIRED.com and our print magazine (if you'd like). Subscriptions help fund the work we do every day.
If you buy something using links in our stories, we may earn a commission. This helps support our journalism.
Learn more. Please also considersubscribing to WIREDBest Compact DesktopSometimes you just need something small and speedy. For anyone who doesn't have the extra space for a gaming setup or the desire to dedicate a corner of your hangar bay to housing a big old desk, look no further than the MSI Trident X. The Trident is about the size of a standard game console, like an Xbox Series X or the PlayStation 5 (OK, maybe notthatbig.) It's the perfect size to slip beside your TV or into an entertainment center. Despite its compactness, the Trident X is a powerful gaming machine that can play most anything without trouble.
As listed on Amazon, the Trident comes with a GeForce RTX 2070 graphics card and 32 gigabytes of RAM which should be enough horsepower for most of the latest games.
Sleek and StylishAlienware's design language used to be all about making computers look like angular space artifacts; cursed objects half-hidden beneath the sands of Mars, humming with indescribable power. More recent Alienware products, like the Aurora R12, embrace a smoother, more organic-looking exterior design, and I couldn't be happier.
The Aurora R12 is a powerful gaming desktop, but it's also a conversation piece. It's smooth, rounded exterior makes it look like a big speaker or some kind of air purifier, and I mean that in the best way. Those design flourishes aren't just for show—that sleek chassis is designed to maximize heat distribution and ensure that cool air is well distributed among internal components.
Going through the configuration tool, you'll want to choose at least an Intel Core i7 processor (i3 and i5 are weaker), which will also come with a graphics card from the RTX 30XX lineup, which will give you ample power for your money.
Bespoke BeautyVisiting Origin's website to shop for a PC is like walking into a sleek spaceport with merchants from all over the galaxy. There is a wealth of customization options at your fingertips, and each PC is built to order, so you can be sure you're getting exactly what you want. On top of that, the Origin Millennium is a remarkably solid machine that's built to last. It arrives at your doorstep in a crate worthy of the Ark of the Covenant. Origin's attention to detail makes it one of the best gaming rigs money can buy.
The Origin configuration tool can be a little intimidating but it's super comprehensive. You get more options here than you do for any other desktop on this list. AMD Ryzen builds will go far, starting with a Ryzen 5 5600X processor and GeForce RTX 3060 graphics card. Don't worry too much about the motherboard and fan options, if you're unsure, just go with the defaults.
Gaudy GoodnessThe Acer Predator Orion 3000 is like an angular black dreadnought cruising through space in search of its next victims. The slate-black tower is illuminated from within by ice-blue LEDs and filled to the brim with powerful hardware. Its "gamer aesthetic" gets a lot of criticism nowadays, but just like the exaggerated 1990's vaporwave look that's so popular right now, when gaudy is done right it's kind of great. The Predator Orion 3000 embraces its supervillain-Sith-Lord look and pulls it off withstyle.
Plus, since it packs an Nvidia GeForce RTX 3070, it's one of the easiest ways to get your hands on a powerful graphics card.
This one you'll just want to keep with it the default. They're solid and come in at a very reasonable price.
A Custom PC On RailsOne of the best ways to get a great gaming PC is to build one yourself, but if you're not up for learning how to put it together—and we can't blame you,it's hard—then NZXT offers the next best thing. The company'sBLD gaming PCslet you pick the parts you'd like in your gaming rig, using handy wizards that will give you an idea of what your new machine will be capable of.
You can see framerate estimates for popular games likeFortniteorMinecraftthat will update based on which graphics card, processor type, or other components you choose. This can help you decide on the right parts even if you're not sure what they all mean. Once you've chosen your build, the company will put it together for you and ship it to your home.
Do-It-YourselfSet a Budget:If you're new to PC gaming, it's easy to get overwhelmed by the price of entry. It can seem like you need to spend $2,000 or $3,000 just to get a decent gaming PC, but you don't. PC gaming is just as much about deal hunting as it is about, you know, playing games. As long as you're willing to spend $700 to $1,000, you can put together a solid gaming rig. We have afull guide on how to build a PCif you're ready to take the plunge.
Choosing a Graphics Card:For a gaming desktop, your graphics card is your most important piece of hardware, but that doesn’t mean you need the best and most expensive. If you’re getting an Nvidia card, older GeForce GTX 10XXs will be okay for some games (and possibly easier to find) but newer GeForce RTX 20XXs will handle modern games more easily. If you can get your hands on GeForce RTX 30XXs, you'll be a lot more future proof, but these are nearly impossible to find at MSRP right now, so you'll have to stalk store availability, or pay hundreds more than retail just to get one. In fact, one of the most reliable ways to get an RTX 30XX is to buy a PC with the card already inside, remove it, and sell the remaining parts.
For most people building a gaming PC, the 10-series will do for shoestring budget machines and 20-series cards will get you to the middle of the pack. Unfortunately, tricking out a high-end PC right now is a chaotic market due to supply chain shortages.
WIRED COUPONSExtra savings up to $15 with TurboTax discountH&R Block Promotion: Free online tax filingShop shoes on sale for under $100 from Finish LineExtra $10 off when using this DoorDash coupon codeExtra 30% off your online order with Groupon promo codeExtra 8% off your hotel reservation with Expedia promo codeMore From WIREDContact© 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of ourUser AgreementandPrivacy Policy and Cookie StatementandYour California Privacy Rights.
Wiredmay earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
Ad Choices
