old id = 3838
9 Best TVs We've Tested (2022): Cheap, 4K, 8K, OLED, and Tips  | WIRED
2022
https://www.wired.com/gallery/the-6-best-boldest-and-most-budget-friendly-tvs

To revisit this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
To revisit this article, select My Account, thenView saved storiesParker HallThe Best TVs (and Helpful Buying Tips)Saving up fora new screen? To help you navigate the dozens of seemingly identical TV models from Samsung, LG, Vizio, TCL, Sony, and other manufacturers, we've watched hundreds of hours of content on them and picked a few of our favorites. We've listed everything from the best budget TV to the absolute best set you can buy—and a few excellent choices in between.
Unless labeled otherwise, every TV we link to is 55 inches. There are often larger and smaller sizes available on the retailer's site, but this is a very good size for most living rooms. All of these models have a 4K Ultra HD pixel resolution (and some have 8K), because there aren't a lot of good reasons to buy a standard HDTV anymore.
We also believe you shouldinvest in a good soundbarandTV streaming stick. TVs now come with wonderful displays, but they're terrible at sound and running apps. Be sure to check out our many otherbuying guides.
Updated January 2022: We're waiting on the new batch of 2022 TVs, which means you can snag some of our current favorites below for cheaper than before. That said, there have beenmild price fluctuations due to the international chip shortage. We've updated the links and prices, but they may change more than usual.
Special offer for Gear readers: Get a1-year subscription toWIREDfor $5 ($25 off). This includes unlimited access toWIRED.
com and our print magazine (if you'd like). Subscriptions help fund the work we do every day.
If you buy something using links in our stories, we may earn a commission. This helps support our journalism.
Learn more. Please also considersubscribing to WIREDBest OverallMost of us don't have gargantuan budgets for a new TV, but we do want to buy one that will last. For that, our favorite TV at the moment is the 2020 TCL 6-Series (9/10, WIRED Recommends). It's a beautiful 4K TV that marries advanced technology like quantum dots (great for bright colors) and local dimming (for deeper blacks) with a built-in Roku interface. TCL is known for competitive pricing, and this 6-Series is no exception, providing the image quality we'd expect from LG and Samsung models that cost nearly double the price. It even has Dolby Vision support, our favorite high-dynamic-range format, which provides exceptionally vivid colors.
The included Micro-LED backlighting is the star of the show, providing exceptional contrast and nearly none of that annoying "halo" effect when you look at bright objects on dark backgrounds. We expect new TCL models—which will have even better gaming performance—to begin hitting shelves later this year, but we don't yet have formal release dates, which means this is still a good buy for now.
★ Alternatives:This isn't the latest 6-Series from TCL; the company also makesa significantly more expensive 8K versionin larger sizes. Given the lack of 8K content and the fact that it's much pricier right now, we still recommend this 2020 model.
Runner Up (Best Value for Gamers)It doesn't have quite the same gorgeous local dimming as the TCL 6-Series, but a built-in Android interface and 120-Hz refresh rate make this model from Hisense (8/10, WIRED Recommends) a great buy, especially if you own a PlayStation 5 and Xbox Series X. They are capable of taking advantage and showing some games at a smooth 120 fames per second. You can play games and watch sports with a smoother onscreen feel, and the center stand is one of the most attractive I've seen on a TV under $1,000—a consideration for those who don't want to hang it on the wall.
Now's still a solid time to buy. The 2022 Hisense models don't yet have formal release dates, with the company targeting a “late-summer” launch.
Best Entry-Level TVTCL's partnership with Roku has made its TVs quite popular—and they deserve the attention. The 6-Series offers the most perks, but the 2020 5-Series 4K TV with HDR is the entry-level TV we recommend. Unlike its predecessor, which was edge-lit, the latest 5-Series gets full-array local dimming, which means it has deeper contrast than many TVs. It's usable for gaming and looks better than the HD set you might have right now. It comes with built-in Roku, so the remote is easy to use, and it streams right out of the box. We recommend the 50-inch model because it's the best bang for your buck, but TCL makes other sizes.
Other Good TVs Under $700The Vizio M-Series Quantum 55-Inch ($578)is a great-looking TV we also like (8/10, WIRED Recommends). Vizio has improved its Smartcast interface, which makes casting tabs from laptops and cell phones that much easier. Expect great contrast, thanks to Vizio's excellent local dimming technology, though not as many zones as you'll get on the TCL 6-series.
The Sony X80J ($598)is one of the prettiest TVs for the money, thanks in part to its image processing and onboard X1 chip. Below $1,000, the processing is a huge part of what makes one TV better than another, and Sony has long had some of the best. Even without local dimming, the display looks bright and vibrant and doesn't bleed too much during dark scenes. It has a game mode that works well with PlayStations (though it can't attain the 4K,120-Hz refresh rateof the PlayStation 5). If it isn't on sale for less than $700, wait until it is.
Best for Gamers (PC, PS5, and Xbox Series X)Any TV in this guidewill work for gamingon a next-generation console likePlayStation 5orXbox Series X/S, but if you want to own the best picture possible, you should seek out an OLED TV, and LG is the only TV maker that manufactures them. (Sony and others buy OLED displays from LG.)LG OLED TVs are better for a simple reason: They light up pixel by pixel. They don't have a backlight, so when you see black areas of the screen, they're as black as possible. This means excellent contrast—perfect for darker scenes inThe Mandolorian. LG's WebOS interface isn't our favorite, but the picture quality trumps any qualms we have. I particularly love the 2021 C1 OLED (8/10, WIRED Recommends) because it has Nvidia G-Sync support, which means it works just as flawlessly as a gaming monitor. It is the fastest-responding TV (low input lag), and it has the ability to run 4K at 120 Hz, which means noticeably smoother gameplay on the PS5, Xbox Series X, and PC.
LG has announced newer, even brighter models for 2022, but we don't have release dates yet. The C1 OLED is still a great buy right now.
Best for Bright RoomsThe QN90A (8/10, WIRED Recommends) features Mini LED backlighting for OLED-like contrast (nearly), but it isn't restrained by the brightness issues that hamper LG's premium screen technology. That's why Samsung's 4K flagship is my favorite TV in rooms without blackout curtains. You get gorgeous color accuracy from the quantum-dot-infused panel, a 120-Hz refresh rate, and AMD FreeSync compatibility, which makes it a pretty solid option for gamers. It's about the same price as an equivalent OLED from LG, but you won't have to turn out the lights to get a similarly fantastic image.
Samsung has announced a whole new array of TVs for 2022, but they won't hit store shelves until later this year, so it's still a great time to buy the QN90A.
The Cheapest OLED TVVizio's first-ever OLED TV (9/10, WIRED Recommends) is one of the cheapest OLEDs around. I fell in love with its perfect contrast and bright highlights during testing, and a recent update lets the TV work with the Xbox Series X and PlayStation 5 at 120 frames per second in 4K. That's pretty rad. If you want the best possible picture for the money and you're willing to spend more than you would for the TCL 6-Series above, check out this TV first. It's usually available for $1,200, but it frequently dips below $1,000, so keep an eye out.
The Prettiest TVIf you've found your TV viewing time to be one of the only peaceful pleasures of the past several years and want to be further mesmerized by what's onscreen, there is perhaps no better-looking TV than the Sony A90J OLED. Sure, it's nearly $3,000, but you won't find anything with the same excellent processing and gorgeous OLED panel. It will change the way you see your favorite content for the better. Depending on what your budget is, such a beautiful picture might be worth the extra money.
We also like its Android TV interface more than many built-in smart TV operating systems, though it's not as easy to use as Roku. The only downside? It has weird feet on the ends, so you'll want to wall-mount it unless you have a huge TV stand.
Best 8K OptionWe love the deep black levels offered by LG's OLED models, but if money was no object, we'd buy Samsung's 2021 flagship model, the QN900. It has an astonishing 8K display with full-array local dimming for deeper blacks, and an amazingly wide viewing angle for bigger rooms. It has AMD's FreeSync technology, which makes games look smoother if you hook it up with a PC using an AMD graphics card. The PlayStation 5 and Xbox Series X next-generation consoles will also support 8K resolutions.
You might not be able to find any 8K content to watch for the time being, but if you're looking to buy an amazing, (somewhat) future-proof TV for the upcoming 8K era, the QN900 is the best you'll find.
WIRED and TIRED TVsIf a TV isn't made byLG,Samsung,TCL,Vizio,Sony, orHisense, make sure you've done your research. They're our favorite manufacturers at the moment. A cheap set might look enticing for the price, but try to avoid dirt-cheap models from brands like Sceptre, which can seem like great deals but may not offer good picture or build quality. If your budget doesn’t extend to a new model from the above brands, we recommend looking into last year's TVs (often sold at steep discounts) or factory-refurbished options.
Helpful DefinitionsBuying a TV requires navigating a sea of lingo—let's quickly define a few key terms.
WIRED COUPONSExtra savings up to $15 with TurboTax discountH&R Block Promotion: Free online tax filingShop shoes on sale for under $100 from Finish LineExtra $10 off when using this DoorDash coupon codeExtra 30% off your online order with Groupon promo codeExtra 8% off your hotel reservation with Expedia promo codeMore From WIREDContact© 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of ourUser AgreementandPrivacy Policy and Cookie StatementandYour California Privacy Rights.
Wiredmay earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
Ad Choices
