old id = 3893
6 Best Outdoor Security Cameras (2022): For Homes, Businesses, and More | WIRED
2022
https://www.wired.com/gallery/best-outdoor-security-cameras

To revisit this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
To revisit this article, select My Account, thenView saved storiesSimon HillAdrienne SoThe Best Outdoor Security CamerasComplete security systemsare expensive, but it's actually become very affordable and easy to install a couple of security cameras outside your home. Cover the exterior and you'll know whenever there’s an intruder. Outdoor security cameras can deter burglaries, home invasions, and porch pirates; they’re also great for keeping an eye on the comings and goings of your family and pets.
The potential security benefits are attractive, but there is a trade-off in privacy, and you can expect some ongoing costs and maintenance. After months of rigorous testing, we've identified the best outdoor security cameras. We also highlight what should be top of mind when buying an internet-connected device, as well as installation options. Just want to monitor your home's interior? OurBest Indoor Security Cameras,Best Video Doorbell Cameras, andBest Pet Cameraguides can help.
Updated May 2022: We added cameras from Arlo, D-Link, Ezviz, Nooie, and others. We also added a note on the recently exposed security flaw with some Wyze cameras.
Special offer for Gear readers: Get a1-year subscription toWIREDfor $5 ($25 off). This includes unlimited access toWIRED.
com and our print magazine (if you'd like). Subscriptions help fund the work we do every day.
If you buy something using links in our stories, we may earn a commission. This helps support our journalism.
Learn more. Please also considersubscribing to WIREDAdvice on Security CamerasSecurity cameras can be very useful, but you must choose carefully. You might not be as concerned about potential hacks as you would be with indoor security cameras, but no one wants strangers tuning into their backyard. Follow these tips to get the peace of mind you crave without infringing on anyone’s privacy.
Choose your brand carefully: There are countless outdoor security cameras on the market at temptingly low prices. But unknown brands represent a real privacy risk. Some of the top security camera manufacturers—includingRing,Wyze, and Eufy—have been breached, but it was public scrutiny that forced them to make improvements. Any system is potentially hackable, but lesser-known brands are less likely to be called out and often disappear or change names when they are.
Consider security: A strong password is good, but biometric support is much more convenient and secure. We prefer security cameras with mobile apps that support fingerprint or face unlock.
Two-factor authentication(2FA) ensures that someone with your username and password cannot log in to your camera. Usually, it requires a code from an SMS, email, or an authenticator app, adding an extra layer of security. It's becoming an industry standard, but it's still something you need to manually activate. We do not recommend any cameras here that don’t at least offer 2FA as an option.
Keep it updated: It’s vital to regularly check for software updates, not just for your security cameras and apps but also for your router and other internet-connected devices. Ideally, your chosen security camera has an automatic update option.
Best OverallCrystal clear footage day or night, speedy load times for the live feed, and a smart notification system make the Arlo Pro 4 our favorite outdoor security camera. It connects directly to Wi-Fi, has a wide 160-degree field of view, and records at up to 2K resolutionwithHDR. (Your feed won't look blown out when there's a light source in the frame.) There’s also a choice of color night vision or spotlight, which uses the integrated light to illuminate the scene. Two-way audio is clear and relatively lag-free, and there’s a built-in siren. Over months of testing, it has proven to be a consistent and reliable performer. Arlo claims up to six months of battery life, but this depends entirely on how busy it is; mine needed a charge after less than three months.
It has an easy-to-use app, and the camera filters motion alerts by people, animals, vehicles, and packages. The notification system is swift and accurate, offering animated previews and screenshots with highlighted subjects that are easy to read even on a smartwatch screen. The catch? You need an Arlo Secure plan ($3 per month for a single camera) to make the most of these features, and it also gets you 30 days of cloud video history.
Supports Amazon Alexa, Google Assistant, and Apple HomeKit.
★ Another alternative: If you want the best picture quality possible, theArlo Ultra 2 ($250)is a 4K camera that offers everything the Pro 4 does but boasts a wider 180-degree field of view and a higher resolution. While 4K footage is incredibly crisp and HDR ensures a balanced picture, you must subscribe to an Arlo Secure plan to unlock this camera’s full potential, and 4K streams require a lot of bandwidth (you need fast internet service and agood router).
No Subscription RequiredIf you don’t want monthly fees, go for this EufyCam system, which includes two cameras. It records video wirelessly to a HomeBase hub that has 16 GB of storage. The hub connects to your router via Ethernet cable or Wi-Fi and doubles up as a Wi-Fi repeater, which can be handy if you want to install cameras farther away from your router. The video footage is mostly crisp and clear at up to 2K resolution, and there’s a fairly wide 140-degree field of view. You also get two-way audio and a siren to discourage theft. Long battery life is one of the selling points here, with Eufy claiming the cameras can go a full year between charges. (Mine are on 88 and 87 percent after two months.)Eufy’s mobile app is straightforward, and you get features like human detection included with the purchase price. It also boasts solid encryption, 2FA, and fingerprint unlock like the Arlo. The live feed is quick to load, as are recorded videos when you’re at home, but out of the house, loading times are significantly longer. I don't like that notifications don't tell youwhattriggered the motion sensor. Other downsides include limited smart-home capabilities (you can only call up a live feed), no HDR, and a tendency for night vision to blow out in bright areas. The activity zone—a specific area you highlight in the camera's frame to detect motion—is limited to a single rectangle; the Arlo Pro 4 lets you draw multiple zones and tailor the shape.
Supports Amazon Alexa, Google Assistant, and Apple HomeKit.
Best Budget CameraBargains are a big part of the Wyze brand, and the Wyze Cam Outdoor is no different. It records video in Full HD with a 110-degree field of view and comes with a base station that plugs into your router for setup but can connect wirelessly thereafter. This base station takes a MicroSD card (not included) for local video recording, and I strongly recommend utilizing this. Otherwise, there's a 12-second limit for video clips and a five-minute cooldown in between motion events if you store everything in the cloud (accessible for 14 days). If you prefer the cloud, you can pay $24 per year for unlimited video length and no cooldowns, along with other perks like person detection. Stated battery life is between three and six months, but mine needed a charge before it reached three.
I like that you can schedule recording times and customize the camera's detection zone. And because you can also add a MicroSD card to the camera's base, a nifty travel mode lets you take the Cam with you without needing to connect to the base station or Wi-Fi—great if you want to monitor your hotel room on a trip. Unfortunately, the video quality overall doesn't match up to more expensive cameras. The low frame rate gives footage a choppy feel, there’s no HDR, and night vision is only passable. Thereistwo-way audio, but lags make conversations awkward. The live feed and recorded videos are slow to load too.
Note: This camera model was not one of those affected by thesecurity flaw that Wyze failed to fixor report to customers for three years—though that story may still give you pause in choosing a Wyze device. (Here's theofficial Wyze response).
Supports Amazon Alexa and Google Assistant.
Best for Google AssistantThe Nest Outdoor Camera works best for anyone with Google Assistant running the show in the home. It's battery-powered and easy enough for renters to install, with a simple mounting plate and a proprietary magnetic mount that makes it easy to customize the angle. The 130-degree field of view is decent and encompassed my driveway, front door, and most of my front yard. It captures clear 1080p video with HDR and night vision, and it has a clear speaker and microphone. The alerts are seamless, and the motion detector was accurate and sensitive enough to tell that the slight whisk of a passing ponytail was a person.
You need a Google account and the Google Home app to use it. You don'tneedthe $6 per month Nest Aware subscription, but most people buying Google devices are probably not afraid of storing data on the cloud or of machine learning. It's worth it to have features like the camera's ability to learn faces and 60-day event history, and even more so if you're bundling it with yourNest Doorbell. The battery needs charging after a little more than a month.
Supports Google Assistant.
Best for Apple HomeKitThere are some big caveats to this Logitech security camera. First, it has a permanently attached 10-foot power cord that'snotweather-proof, so you'll need to be careful when you route it to an indoor outlet. It also requires a HomeKit hub, such asHomePod Mini,Apple TV, oriPad, and while you can record 10 days of video events to your iCloud account, it's only worthwhile if you cough up for an iCloud storage plan. There's also zero compatibility with Android, so it might be useless for anyone in the household without an Apple gadget.
If none of that phases you, then it's a solid outdoor camera for privacy-minded folks. It doesn’t have a separate app of its own. Instead, you add it directly in Apple's Home app by scanning a QR code. It captures Full HD video and boasts an extremely wide 180-degree field of view, though there's a bit of a fish-eye effect here. (The lack of HDR also means areas are sometimes too dark or blown out.) There's motion detection, two-way audio, and decent night vision, and you can ask Siri to display the live feed, which loads quickly. The camera can differentiate between people, animals, or vehicles, and rich notifications let you play video clips right from your iPhone's lock screen.
Supports Apple HomeKit.
Pan and Tilt CameraYou may need several security cameras to properly cover an area, but the Ezviz C8C offers an alternative solution, as it can pan 352 degrees horizontally and tilt 95 degrees vertically. It has an IP65 rating, so it can handle the elements, but it's wired; you have to run a cable to a power outlet. It’s an imposing sphere-shaped camera with two antennas that makes it look like aStar Warsdroid. Connect it via Wi-Fi or Ethernet, and the versatile, included L-shaped bracket lets you attach it to an overhanging portion of the roof or to a wall. A panel on the back screws open to reveal the MicroSD card slot (sold separately).
You can control it via a simple app that loads the feed quickly. The video resolution maxes out at 1080p but captures plenty of detail, and the built-in person detection is consistently good. There’s a microphone to record sound but no speaker; the C8C's black-and-white night vision is crisp, though it switches to color when it detects motion. Sadly, there’s no HDR, and it unsurprisingly struggles with mixed lighting. There’s optional cloud storage, but it’s very pricey, starting at $6 per month for a single camera for just seven days of video. You also annoyingly need to remember to fix the camera view back on the main area you want to monitor when you’re done panning around.
Supports Amazon Alexa and Google Assistant.
★ Another alternative: For folks in the UK, theD-Link 2K QHD Pan & Zoom Outdoor Wi-Fi Camera (£125)offers great range of motion and clear footage, is a breeze to install, and works via Ethernet cable or Wi-Fi. Alerts were reliable in my testing, and you have the option of a MicroSD card or the cloud for video storage, though you must subscribe for the latter. There are several additional features, including person and vehicle detection and tracking, but when my internet went down, I had to power-cycle the camera to get it to reconnect, and there was considerable lag on the two-way audio.
Honorable MentionsWe have tested several other outdoor security cameras. These are the ones we like that just missed out on a place above.
Reolink Argus 3 Pro for $120:There’s a lot to like with this security camera, not least the affordable price. It offers 2K video, local or cloud storage, two-way audio, a siren, and person recognition. The live feed loads fast, and it’s cheap to buy a solar panel accessory for power. It misses out on a place above because there’s no 2FA and the app is a little confusing.
Wyze Cam V3 for $36:This camera has an IP65 rating making, it suitable for outdoor use. It comes close to matching the Wyze Cam Outdoor on video quality and features, but because it must be plugged in, you might easily end up spending more on a lengthy cable than on the camera itself. Local storage is also limited to a MicroSD card on the device.
EufyCam 2C 2-Cam Kit for $240:This camera system is very similar to the EufyCam 2 Pro, but the video resolution is limited to 1080p, the battery life isn’t as good, and it has a narrower field of view and weaker encryption. If you can live with those differences, it's a good alternative.
Ezviz C3X for $89: Like the C8C above, the C3X gets the basics right, offering crisp footage and reliable alerts. It sports a dual lens for better night vision, offering full-color video without the need for a spotlight. It is also easy to set up, takes a MicroSD card, and supports convenient two-factor authentication with a fingerprint. Unfortunately, you have to run a power cable (there’s optional Ethernet too), and the cloud subscription is too expensive.
SimpliSafe Wireless Outdoor Security Camera for $170: A solid set of features, crisp 1080p video, and support for HDR sounds tempting, but you need a Simplisafe security system (9/10, WIRED recommends) and monitoring plan to make this camera worthwhile, making it too expensive for what you get. (The Arlo Pro 4 offers better-quality video and more features.) It may be a useful add-on for existing SimpliSafe customers, though.
Don’t Buy TheseWe didn't like every camera we tested. These are the ones to avoid.
Canary Flex: I love the curved lozenge design of the Canary Flex, but it is by far the most unreliable security camera we tested. It frequently missed people walking past altogether or started recording when they had almost left the frame. Night vision and low-light video quality are poor, and the app is very slow to load.
Ring Stick Up Cam: Because of Ring’ssuburban surveillance,high-profile hacks, anddata-sharing with law enforcement, we don’t recommend its cameras. But I did test this one and found the low frame rate, slow loading, and bulky design off-putting.
Nooie Cam Outdoor: It resembles Google’s Nest Cam Outdoor but costs far less. However, the Nooie Cam Outdoor comes undone when you open the unreliable and buggy Android app. Sometimes it works smoothly. Sometimes it hangs trying to load the camera feed. Alerts were similarly inconsistent. A relatively thick, flat, USB-A power cord will also present a placement problem for some.
Mi Wireless Outdoor Security Camera: Xiaomi’s camera looks the part and is affordable, but things go downhill from there. It took several attempts to get this camera set up, with no indication of what the problem was from the flaky app. When I finally did, the footage lacked detail and suffered from overexposure. It also requires an indoor receiver.
Kangaroo Indoor + Outdoor Cam: This cute design works inside or out, is easy to set up, and is very cheap. But I found the Kangaroo app slow to load the camera feed, some events failed to trigger an alert, sound alerts felt random, and motion appears blurry and laggy because of the low frame rate. Intrusive upselling in the app pushes subscription upgrades, and you need a long power cable, as there’s no battery.
Picking a SystemThere isa lotto consider when you are shopping for an outdoor security camera. It can be tough to determine which features you need, so here are some important questions to run through.
Wired or battery: Wired cameras usually require some drilling to install, must be within reach of a power outlet, and will go out if the power does, but they never need to be charged. If you buy battery-powered security cameras, the installation is easier, and you can pick the spots you want. They usually run for months before needing to be recharged and will warn you when the battery is low, but that does mean you have to remove the battery, or sometimes the entire camera, to recharge it, which typically takes a few hours. It’s worth noting that you can buy solar panels to power some battery-powered cameras now, which gives you the best of both worlds.
Video quality: You may be tempted to go with the highest-resolution video you can get, but this isn’t always the best idea. You can see more details in a 4K video, but it requires much more bandwidth to stream and more storage space to record than Full HD or 2K resolution. Folks with limited Wi-Fi should be cautious. You will generally want a wide field of view, so the camera takes in more, but this can cause a curved fish-eye effect at the corners, and some cameras are better than others at correcting for distortion. An important feature, particularly if your camera is facing a mixed lighting location with some shadow and direct sunlight (or a street light), is HDR support, as it can prevent light areas from blowing out or dark areas from losing detail.
Connectivity: Most security cameras will connect to your Wi-Fi router on the 2.4-GHz band. Depending on where you intend to install them, you may appreciate support for the 5-GHz band, which enables the stream to load more quickly. Some systems, such as the EufyCam 2 Pro, come with a hub that can act as a Wi-Fi range extender. Bear in mind that you shouldn't install a security camera in a location without a strong Wi-Fi signal.
Subscription model: Most security camera manufacturers offer a subscription service that provides cloud storage for video recording. It isn’t always as optional as it seems. Some manufacturers bundle in smart features such as person detection or activity zones, making a subscription essential to get the best from its cameras. Always factor in the subscription cost, and make sure you are clear on what is included before you buy.
Local or cloud storage: If you don’t want to sign up for a subscription service and upload video clips to the cloud, make sure your chosen camera offers local storage. Some security cameras have MicroSD card slots, while others record video to a hub device inside your home. A few manufacturers offer limited cloud storage for free, but you can usually expect to pay somewhere around $3 to $6 per month for 30 days of storage for a single camera. For multiple cameras, a longer recording period, or continuous recording, you are looking at paying between $10 and $15 per month. There are usually discounts if you pay annually.
Placement is important: Remember that avisible security camera is a powerful deterrent. You don’t want to hide your cameras away. Also, make sure the view isn't peering into a neighbor's window. Most cameras offer customizable zones to filter out recording or motion detection for areas of the camera's frame. If you buy a battery-powered camera, remember that you will have to charge it periodically, so it has to be somewhat accessible. The ideal placement for security cameras is around 7 feet above the ground and angled slightly downwards.
False positives: Unless you want your phone to ping every time your cat wanders onto the porch or when the neighbor’s dog runs through your garden, consider a security camera that can detect people and filter alerts.
Night vision and spotlights: Outdoor security cameras generally have infrared night vision, but low-light performance varies wildly. You always lose some detail when light levels are low. Most night vision modes produce monochrome footage. Some manufacturers offer color night vision, though it is often colorized by software and can look odd. We prefer spotlights, as they allow the camera to capture better-quality footage, and the light acts as a further deterrent to any intruder. But they aren’t suitable for every situation, and they drain batteries faster if not wired.
Camera theft: Concerned about camera theft? Choose a camera that doesn’t have onboard storage. You might also want to consider a protective cage and screw mount rather than a magnetic mount. Some manufacturers have replacement policies for camera theft, especially if you have a subscription, but they usually require you to file a police report and have exclusions. Check the policy thoroughly before you buy.
WIRED COUPONSExtra savings up to $15 with TurboTax discountH&R Block Promotion: Free online tax filingShop shoes on sale for under $100 from Finish LineExtra 20% off sitewide - Dyson promo code 2022GoPro Hot Deal: $150 off the new HERO10 Black BonesSamsung coupon - 45% off select items + free shippingMore From WIREDContact© 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of ourUser AgreementandPrivacy Policy and Cookie StatementandYour California Privacy Rights.
Wiredmay earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
Ad Choices
