old id = 3920
FAQ - Good Grief Network
2022
https://www.goodgriefnetwork.org/faq

Frequently Asked QuestionsOur unique 10-Step Program helps individuals and communities build resilience bycreating spaces where people can lean into their painful feelings about the state of the world and reorient their lives toward meaningful action.
What is Good Grief Network?What are the 10-Steps?What is eco-grief or eco-anxiety?Does GGN help people who are grieving a personal loss?Good Grief Network helps people who feel eco-grief about the state of the world; our support groups do not focus on processsing the acute grief that results from a personal loss.
If you’ve found our page while searching for support in grieving the loss of a loved one, we are so sorry to hear that you are struggling. Each member of our team has experienced devastating loss, and we remember how painful this stage of processing can feel.
Are GGN's facilitators therapists?When is your next 10-Step program?Do you run 10-Step programs for kids?How can I support your work?Glossary of TermsA NOTE OF THANKS:We think it can sometimes feel challenging to embrace new terminology, and want to thank you for being open to exploring new ways of communicating. We believe that language can be used as a weapon or a bridge, and as an organization, we strive to use clear and inclusive language that recognizes cultural differences, fosters connection, and creates openings in conversation.
We recognize that the terms we use won’t be clear to people who have never heard them before. For that reason, we’ve put together this Glossary of Terms to help explain what we mean when we use certain terms in our materials. This glossary is an evolving and collaborative work in progress and is not perfect. Please bear with us as we, too, examine the nuances of language and learn to communicate in new ways.
Decolonial:A theoretical framework that is interested in deconstructing/undoing/de-linking Eurocentric ways of understanding the world. (Definition borrowed fromAphro-ism: Essays on Pop Culture, Feminism, and Black Veganism from Two Sisters,with much respect and gratitude to Aph Ko and Syl Ko.)Decolonize:The practice of deconstructing Eurocentric ways of understanding the world and de-linking those ways of understanding from our behaviors. (Definition borrowed fromAphro-ism: Essays on Pop Culture, Feminism, and Black Veganism from Two Sisters,with much respect and gratitude to Aph Ko and Syl Ko.)Dominant Paradigm:The monolithic and homogenized culture prevalent in the Western world, characterized by capitalism (more specifically neoliberalism), patriarchy, racism, and other systems of oppression.
Ecological Anxiety:The chronic fear of environmental doom.
Ecological Grief:The feeling of emotional and psychological loss suffered as a result of losses in the natural world.
Emotional Processing:The process by which people identify, discuss, and manage extreme feelings, in order to gradually reduce the amount of emotional reactivity that occurs in response to the thoughts and events that gave rise to such feelings.
Heart-Centered:A state of being in which we prioritize information and make decisions based on compassion, insight and body wisdom, rather than from exclusively rational and egocentric motivations.
Heart-Centered Revolution:A revolution where we open to the innate wisdom that has been buried and covered up by the dominant paradigm. As we open to our interconnectedness to all beings and the natural world, we make decisions based on compassion and insight rather than from egocentric motivations. Instead of thoughtless and selfish actions, we reinvest ourselves with an understanding of the consequences to the larger world. The heart-centered revolution is brought about by our inner equanimity and from our Love for each other, the natural world, and ourselves.
Predicament:The interlinked set of problems that have amassed such complexity they can no longer be solved. Moving forward, we establish relationships with a predicament instead of solving it.
Solastalgia:The feeling of being homesick when one is still at home because the environment has changed so much that it is no longer recognizable and the solace once found there is lost.
Sign up for our email newsletter!Success!NameEmailSubscribeCopyright ©2022| Good Grief Network
