old id = 525
Human-Centered Innovation: Powered by AI | MIT Technology Review
2022
https://www.technologyreview.com/2021/06/10/1043567/human-centered-innovation-powered-by-ai

SponsoredHuman-Centered Innovation: Powered by AIPresented bySiemensWith human-centered innovation people’s needs come first. It translates into enabling more sustainable, accessible, easy to use products while keeping in mind human needs throughout the process of creating these products. Digitalization is key to achieving human-centered innovation and applying AI to optimize everything from the design, materials, connectivity to the manufacturing process and closing the loop from the experience of the user to the designer's desktop.
About the speakersSuzanne Kopcha, Vice President, Consumer Products & Retail, SiemensSuzanne Kopcha is the Vice President of Global Strategy for Consumer Products & Retail. Suzanne has 31+ years of experience in global strategy, business development, and leading digital transformation and M&A initiatives. Suzanne spent 25+ years with Procter & Gamble and secured 2 US Patents.
Suzanne’s passion is the development of next-generation leaders; especially those that start from a point of disadvantage. Suzanne deeply believes that diversity of thought and perspective is critical to the advancement of innovation and high-performing organizations.
Suzanne holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Management Information Systems and Marketing from LeMoyne College and an MBA from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
Suzanne resides in Cincinnati, Ohio with her husband and 2 children.
Elizabeth Bramson-Boudreau, CEO and Publisher, MIT Technology ReviewElizabeth Bramson-Boudreau is the CEO and publisher of MIT Technology Review, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s independent media company.
Since Elizabeth took the helm of MIT Technology Review in mid-2017, the business has undergone a massive transformation from its previous position as a respected but niche print magazine to a widely read, multi-platform media brand with a global audience and a sustainable business. Under her leadership, MIT Technology Review has been lauded for its editorial authority, its best-in-class events, and its novel use of independent, original research to support both advertisers and readers.
Elizabeth has a 20-year background in building and running teams at world-leading media companies. She maintains a keen focus on new ways to commercialize media content to appeal to discerning, demanding consumers as well as B2B audiences.
Prior to joining MIT Technology Review, Elizabeth held a senior executive role at The Economist Group, where her leadership stretched across business lines and included mergers and acquisitions; editorial and product creation and modernization; sales; marketing; and events. Earlier in her career, she worked as a consultant advising technology firms on market entry and international expansion.
Elizabeth holds an executive MBA from the London Business School, an MSc from the London School of Economics, and a bachelor’s degree from Swarthmore College.
SharePopularDeep DiveArtificial intelligenceArtificial intelligence is creating a new colonial world orderAn MIT Technology Review series investigates how AI is enriching a powerful few by dispossessing communities that have been dispossessed before.
Meta has built a massive new language AI—and it’s giving it away for freeFacebook’s parent company is inviting researchers to pore over and pick apart the flaws in its version of GPT-3This horse-riding astronaut is a milestone in AI’s journey to make sense of the worldOpenAI’s latest picture-making AI is amazing—but raises questions about what we mean by intelligence.
How the AI industry profits from catastropheAs the demand for data labeling exploded, an economic catastrophe turned Venezuela into ground zero for a new model of labor exploitation.
Stay connectedGet the latest updates fromMIT Technology ReviewDiscover special offers, top stories, upcoming events, and more.
Thank you for submitting your email!It looks like something went wrong.
We’re having trouble saving your preferences. Try refreshing this page and updating them one more time. If you continue to get this message, reach out to us atcustomer-service@technologyreview.comwith a list of newsletters you’d like to receive.
MIT Technology ReviewOur in-depth reporting reveals what’s going on now to prepare you for what’s coming next.
Subscribeto support our journalism.
AboutHelp© 2022 MIT Technology Review
