old id = 4005
8 Best Sunrise Alarm Clocks (2022): Homelabs, Philips, Casper | WIRED
2022
https://www.wired.com/gallery/best-sunrise-alarm-clocks

To revisit this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
To revisit this article, select My Account, thenView saved storiesMatt JancerThe Best Sunrise Alarms to Help You Rise and ShineAre you anight owl or an early bird? Do you wake up when it's dark out or whittle away your evenings long past sunset? Modern humans keep strange hours, and we no longer go to bed or rise with our natural sleep cycles. Almost all of usneed more sleep. There's a better way to fall asleep and wake up than by flicking out the lights at night or drawing open the curtains in the morning as if you're opening theArk of the Covenant right in your own face: Use a sunrise alarm to cope.
Sunrise alarms simulate gradual sunsets at night and gradual sunrises in the morning to help you fall asleep and wake up more naturally by tricking your biological hardware. I've tested the best sunrise alarm clocks—and a few of the worst. These are my favorites.
Check out our many otherbuying guides, such as theBest Mattresses, theBest Weighted Blankets, and theBest Sound Machines, all of which could help you get a better night's sleep.
Updated March 2022: We've added the Hatch Restore and directions on how to set up a sunrise routine using Philips Hue smart light bulbs.
Special offer for Gear readers: Get a1-year subscription toWIREDfor $5 ($25 off). This includes unlimited access toWIRED.
com and our print magazine (if you'd like). Subscriptions help fund the work we do every day.
If you buy something using links in our stories, we may earn a commission. This helps support our journalism.
Learn more. Please also considersubscribing to WIREDWhy You’d Want a Sunrise AlarmYour body is built to wake naturally with the sunrise and feel sleepy as it sets. The sun rises at a deeply orange 2,000 kelvin and transitions to a rich, golden 3,500 K on its way to a bluer midday sun around 5,500 K. Sunsets do the reverse.
My apartment was the perfect lab for testing these alarms. In my bedroom, I hang blackout curtains because I live on a busy city street that's somehow brighter at night than during the day. I'm a heavy sleeper who doesn't have a problem waking up, but that doesn't mean I enjoy it. Every morning I lurch out of bed like a crash-test dummy flying through an invisible windshield and run for coffee. When I woke up with (most of) these sunrise alarms, I had an easier transition into consciousness.
If you don't have access to a window in your bedroom, or maybe you use blackout curtains like me, a sunrise alarm could make your mornings or nights a little easier.
Best OverallYanking it out of the box, the build quality of this thing smacked me right upside the head. A solid metal stand and touch-sensitive buttons for $40!? Hell yes. It's simple to use, and the light on the sunset setting was warm and relaxing. The artificial sunrise was enough to rouse me out of bed, but it wasn't too bright. There are nature sounds, like birds and ocean waves, to help you wake up too.
It did a good job of casting enough light when it was the only lamp in my otherwise dark bedroom, but it's a bit on the small side, and because of its headlamp-like shape it shines most in a particular direction. The light is also not as diffused as the higher-end alarms on this list—certainly enough to read by before bed, but not quite as able to bathe the whole room in light. It's still plenty bright to help wake you up, though.
You can dim or turn off the LED display. For people like me, who have always hated seeing glowing numbers in an otherwise dark room, the latter is a great option. I'll never understand why more alarms don't offer it. It's a steal at $40, especially with the extras like multicolor mood lighting, access to an FM radio, and a center Snooze button that's easy to hit.
A Nice UpgradeWhy is this so heavy? And big?Those were my first thoughts when I took Philips' alarm out of the box. It reminded me of my college job at a hot rod shop, lugging around headlights from old 1950s Mercurys and Chevys. That's a good thing. The Philips HF3520 oozes build quality and is easily the nicest alarm in this guide. It has the usual features, such as an audible alarm, five natural wake-up sounds, and an FM radio.
The lens is convex, and some light shines through the back of the casing, so it casts light in more directions than other headlight-shaped sunrise clocks I reviewed, like the Homelabs and Totobay. Light is beautifully diffused, which keeps the rays from being blinding—that's especially nice in a dark room when your pupils are enlarged and particularly susceptible to harsh light. The more upscale Philips SmartSleep model (below) barely beats it out in the quality of light, but the HF3520 has the second-nicest light quality in this roundup. The clock display and touch controls are a cut above the cheaper alarms.
This would be my top pick if it wasn't so expensive. It's five times the price of the Homelabs, but it's not five times the alarm. Perhaps it's worth it if you have a particularly large bedroom and want the extra light for reading as you settle into bed. Itisnicer to look at, though.
Most Intuitive DesignYou've got tohand it to Casperfor intuitive design. To start the sunset program before bed, just flip the alarm over. There's a button on top to pause and unpause it, and when it's sitting on the charging pad, just turn it to adjust the brightness. Everything else, like setting wake-up schedules and adjusting the length of the sunsets and sunrises in 15-minute increments (up to 90 minutes), is controlled through the app.
It has only one shade of light, and while you can adjust the brightness, you can't make it warmer (yellower) or cooler (bluer). But it's a gorgeously warm yellow light. You can pair several together, and they'll sync so you can have one in the living room and another in the bedroom, which will ease your whole apartment into a sunset as you near bedtime. Or just have two on both nightstands. They recharge on a pad the size of a coaster.
Of all the sunrise alarms I tested, this was the best at evenly lighting up a dark room. It's also the only wireless model I tested, so I could start a sunset in the living room and bring it with me into the bedroom later. But it's $130 and doesn't have a clock, a radio, or an audible wake-up buzzer. If you ban your phone from your nightstand every night and need an alarm that can be programmed to scream at you precisely at 6:30 am, you'll need a different sunrise alarm.
The Super-Premium PickAfter testing some of the more affordable options on this list, I was ready to say I couldn't recommend a $270 alarm clock. But the SmartSleep, formerly known as the Somneo, nailed the basics of what a sunrise alarm should be, then piled on a bunch of customizable features you won't find on other devices. First off, the light spreads over the walls like warm butter. It's somewhat directional, but the hole in the middle and convex shape casts light at wider angles than other directional alarms. The light quality is slightly ahead of the other premium alarms on this list, and you can select from four light profiles.
Setting it up was simple. As soon as I plugged it in, the alarm lit up with directions to download the Philips app on my phone. You can control it through the touch-sensitive controls on the alarm's face, but the best way to operate all its features is through the app, (Don't bother with the non-Wi-Fi model.) You can even follow a guided breathing exercise through the light to relax before bed, and the wake-up sounds aren't gimmicky—I loved waking up to the gentle chirping of birds. Still, it's $200. That's some expensive sleep.
Best for SoundsThe Zenergy has the most relaxing sounds before bed and when waking up in the morning. There are 16(!) of them. Some sounds, like those they call Heartbeat and Trance, remind me of science fiction films likeEvent Horizon, but most of them are more natural and offer a very calming effect. Storm, Chimes, and River are my favorites. There's also a guided breathing exercise where a voice instructs you when to take in breaths, hold them, and release them over a soothing track in the background, and it gets me in the mood for bed every time. The see-through cloth cover allows the digital clock and menu items to shine through while hiding unlit display settings that aren't in use. A premium touch.
Color patterns such as Aurora (a rainbow effect) and Pulse (a colored checkerboard pattern) are fun, but they don't keep me relaxed or wake me up. The Zenergy doesn't light up the room nearly as much as the other alarms, so I wouldn't use it to wind down while reading in bed the way I used the others. It was more like a night-light I'd set before climbing into bed and letting it lull me to sleep as it gradually lowered its light.
Custom Routine With Philips HueSmart bulbs are one of the best aspects of the smart home concept today. With the right bulbs and a bit of tinkering, you can set up sunrise and sunset routines using your existing lamps and overhead lights. There arelots of good smart bulbs. I used Philips Hue for this article.
You'll need aHue Smart Hub ($58) to control your smart bulbs away from home, and alsoHue bulbsthat fit your light fixtures. The60W-equivalent A19 ($23)is the most common bulb for a typical lamp. Make sure you buy the White Ambiance or Color model (not the base White) so that you can change the color temperature (measure of whiteness to yellowness).
You can set “At Sunrise” and “At Sunset” routines through the Hue app, and choose from custom scenes to vary the light quality as the lights fade in or out gradually at your preferred time. With a color temperature of 2,200 to 6,500 K, Hue bulbs give a wide range of light, from Super Walmart–white to melted-butter yellow. The downside is that if you don't already have light fixtures in your bedroom, it's an expensive way to build a sunrise-and-sunset system. Und unlike many sunrise alarms, you won't get sleep sounds.
More Sunrise AlarmsLumie's Bodyclock Active 250 ($140)looks and feels like something designed more than a decade ago because itwasdesigned more than a decade ago. Operating it is a pain. Even with the manual in front of me, working the various controls was a headache. Yet it fills up a dark room better than the more directional lamps, although the large vents on the back of the lens cast a peacock pattern of light on the walls. It does a good job of diffusing the light, and it has the usual list of features—a loud alarm, a dimmable clock, a Snooze button, and buttons to adjust brightness and the duration of sunsets and sunrises. The Lumie isn't bad, just expensive for what you get in a market full of newer designs.
Hatch's Restore ($130)combines a sunrise alarm with a sound machine for soothing sounds as you fall asleep. Product reviewer Medea Giordano says that although you have to use the app to use both features, it's fairly easy. Just tap the top of the machine to start your bedtime routine. After one free month of theHatch Sleep Membership, you have to pay $99 per year for the full library of sounds, stories, and meditations, which makes it an expensive buy.
Avoid This OneTheLa Crosse Soluna C80994's sunset feature is sorely lacking. It's a bomb-pop gradient of orange, pink, red, and blue that you can't change to a more uniform color, and it throws a mostly pink light around the room. It lasts for 30 minutes, and you can't change the timer length. It's also the dimmest sunset light of any alarm I've tested. Even right at the beginning of the cycle when it was brightest, I had difficulty reading.
The sunrise mode isn't much brighter, and it ends on a blindingly blue-white shade that's reminiscent of waking up with a flashlight shining in your eyes. The alarm itself looks nice but feels cheaply made. It's $50 but isn't anywhere near my top pick, the HomeLabs, which costs less. I say pass.
WIRED COUPONSExtra 20% off sitewide - Dyson promo code 2022GoPro Hot Deal: $150 off the new HERO10 Black BonesSamsung coupon - 45% off select items + free shippingExtra $100 off XPS & Inspiron laptops, desktops & 2 in 1s with Dell coupon codeDeal of the Day: 1-day flash sale for 20% off electronics & appliancesAT&T Internet promo code - $50 reward with AT&T Fiber orderMore From WIREDContact© 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of ourUser AgreementandPrivacy Policy and Cookie StatementandYour California Privacy Rights.
Wiredmay earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
Ad Choices
