old id = 4019
8 Best Latte and Cappuccino Machines: Breville, Mr. Coffee, and More (2022) | WIRED
2022
https://www.wired.com/story/best-latte-and-cappuccino-machines

To revist this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
To revist this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
Jaina GreyJeffrey Van CampThe Best Latte & Cappuccino Makers We've ReviewedTo revist this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
To revist this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
A good latteor cappuccino is like a rich, milky mug of heaven. Just writing about these delicious, warming drinks makes us want one. Sadly, creating the perfect cap or caffe latte at home can be a hassle. Making a barista-worthy espresso is tough enough, but adding the right amount of milk and foam, perfectly heated and combined, is surprisingly daunting.
That's why we've put together a list of machines that makeexcellentmilk-based or alternative-milk-based beverages. The machines here differ from the picks in ourBest Espresso Machinesroundup in a couple of important ways. Here we're gathering machines that make it easier, specifically, to make milk-based or alternative-milk-based drinks. That includes machines with built-in containers for milk, or machines that effectively do the steaming for you. In that way, these machines are semi-automated and are great for anyone who wants a device that specializes in milk-based beverages.
Be sure to read ourguide to portable espresso makers, thebest cold-brew coffee makers, and our many otherbuying guides.
Updated April 2022: We've added the Cafe Affetto semi-automated machine, removed some machines that didn't make the cut, and updated prices throughout.
Special offer for Gear readers: Get a1-year subscription toWIREDfor $5 ($25 off). This includes unlimited access toWIRED.
com and our print magazine (if you'd like). Subscriptions help fund the work we do every day.
When you buy something using the links in our stories, we may earn a small affiliate commission.
Here's how it works.
Photograph: Mr. CoffeeMr. Coffee One-Touch CoffeeHouseThis Mr. Coffee machine sits at a comfortable intersection where ease of use, automation, and affordability meet up. It can extract a flavorful espresso from almost any beans and grind, and its milk reservoir will automatically mix a cappuccino or latte for you.
This is basically a sturdier, better-designed version of the Mr. Coffee Café Barista, our affordable pick, with a nicer portafilter basket that takesESE espresso podsand a larger milk reservoir that snaps in more firmly. Like the cheaper version, you have to load coffee into the portafilter basket and twist it on (use a fine grind and tamp it down with some pressure for the best taste), but the machine can mix a cappuccino or latte macchiato for you at the press of a button. It has two sizes of each and a manual mode that will just keep foaming or extracting espresso until you tell it to stop.
On the downside, you'll need to clean the milk canister at least once a week. (You can keep it in the fridge.) It also won't extract quite as much rich espresso flavor as the Breville machines below, but it isa loteasier to use. One day, for fun, I (Jeffrey) put standard Maxwell House coffee into it. The result was definitely Maxwell House-like espresso, but it was still an acceptable Maxwell House espresso—good to the last drop™. It pulls as nice an espresso as it can from almost anything.
Photograph: Mr. CoffeeMr. Coffee Cafe BaristaThe Café Barista is a downgraded version of our top pick, the Mr. Coffee One-Touch Coffeehouse. It's perfect if you want pure espresso and a machine that mixes the milk for you without much fuss, but it's also more plasticky and lightweight, which means you really have to steady the machine with your hand as you twist the portafilter into place. But other than that it makes fairly rich single or double-size espressos, cappuccinos, and lattes with the push of a button.
Like the One-Touch Coffeehouse, this machine's integrated milk container has its pros and cons. You will have to remember to remove and refrigerate it each morning and clean it every few days or it could clog up—cleanup is easy, thankfully. Milk tends to come out a little foamier than I (Jeffrey) prefer for a latte, and it took me some time to understand what size glass I needed for each drink. (A double latte, for instance, is 15 ounces, but a double cappuccino is only 10 ounces.) The slide-out booster is nice for smaller glasses.
Photograph: BrevilleBreville Barista ProThe Breville Barista Pro is a coffeehouse in a box. The built-in pressure-activated conical burr grinder gives you fresh grounds however you like them, and the pressure gauge and options let you adjust the water temperature and shot amount. You have to froth your own milk, and the steam wand makes it easier than the competition, with a handle and the ability to tilt in any direction. It cleans itself, and you can get hot water from the machine to brew tea or make an Americano.
Previously we recommended the Express model because it's cheaper, but it was also more difficult to use. The Pro has revamped the controls, and operating it is much simpler and more intuitive. All the accessories you need are included here: a stainless steel milk jug, magnetic tamp, trimming tool, and more.
The Barista Pro isn’t cheap, and it's probably overkill if you already owna burr grinder, but you’d be hard-pressed to find a sturdier, more authentic latte and cappuccino machine that doesn’t cost thousands of dollars.
If you don't mind wading through the manual, theBarista Express ($700)is another good option.
Tip: Use the double-walled filters—they deliver better crema—and when heating your milk, try to position your steam wand just below the surface. If you have it right, the milk will spin as it's heating. Slowly lower the jug to add foam.
Photograph: Café AppliancesGE Cafe Affetto Automatic Espresso MachineThe Cafe Affetto is one of the few automated machines that we've enjoyed. Usually they come witha high price and some hassle. The Affetto features a built-in steaming wand, produces 20 bars of pump pressure to ensure your espresso is fully extracted, and is a slick little machine. It's very slim and fits comfortably on a small apartment countertop without having to rearrange everything. Because coffee production is automated, you just need to fill the water tank and put whole beans in the hopper, and you're good to go. You can brew one or two shots with just the press of a button, and there's a programmable button to create your favorite drinks (like an Americano withjustthe right amount of water).
The milk frother does a lot of the work on its own. Just pour some of your favorite milk into the frothing pitcher, submerge the wand, and hit the steam button. If you're new to frothing milk, you don't even need to move the pitcher to produce a creamy and consistent microfoam. We tested the frother with dairy milk, oat milk, and soy milk. It produced soft and creamy café-grade froth each time.
The Affetto is on the expensive side, and as an automated machine it can be finicky. Just make sure it's topped up with water and beans, and that you clean out the spent grounds container regularly, and it works like a dream.
Photograph: BrevilleBreville Bambino PlusIf you want to play at being a barista but have a small kitchen, take a look at Breville’s new Bambino Plus. This machine has a remarkable number of features squeezed into a compact countertop footprint of 7.5 by 12.5 inches. It doesn’t have a burr grinder like the Barista Pro—and has a similarly high price—but it comes with the same high-quality accessories, such as a tamp and measuring tool.
I found the learning curve on the Bambino Plus to be very steep. You fill up the water tank, fill the portafilter basket and the milk jug to the indicated fill lines, slide them into their respective spots, and push a button. In my testing, the two-shot setting outputs a little less than the advertised 2 ounces of espresso.
However, as with the Barista Express, this isn’t a latte machine for someone who wants a quick, convenient cuppa. The Bambino Plus requires attentive maintenance, whether you’re washing out the drip tray or purging and wiping down the steam wand.
Breville also makes a slightly pared-down version of the Bambino Plus, called the Bambino. It's nearly as capable as its more expensive sibling but lacks a manual brew button, and it's a bit lighter. That means you're essentially stuck with Breville's one- and two-shot settings. You can time your own espresso shots, but it's fiddly and requires holding one of the brew buttons. If you're not careful, that new shot timing can overwrite the original one- or two-shot setting. If you're only ever going to use the one-or two-shot options and don't really mind not being able to easily pull your espresso by hand, the Bambino is a great pick and saves you a bit of cash.
Photograph: KeurigKeurig K-CaféI (Jeffrey) love this machine. It's the best Keurig I’ve used (8/10, WIRED Recommends) and has the best frother of any machine I tested for this guide. Despite the fact that the K-Café doesn’t technically make espresso shots (the K-cup system doesn't put its grounds under any pressure), it still makes a delicious “espresso style” 2-ounce shot that can taste almost as strong, though without the crema that you might desire.
The real magic is the frother. It has three settings—cold, latte, and cappuccino—and froths milk to perfection with the tap of a button. When it’s done, simply pour your milk with the spout on the side. The jug is made of stainless steel, and the plastic spinner comes right off, making cleanup as easy as a quick run under the faucet. It was so simple to use and clean that I sometimes frothed milk with it even when I used other machines to make my espresso. I liked it so much, I didn’t even mind that the spout on the frother was designed for right-handed folks. This lefty was happy to adapt.
Another bonus? While Keurig's single-use coffee-pods used to be hard on recycling systems, they are now100 percent recyclable. Keurig also makesreusable coffee filters; we suggest sticking to the branded ones, as we've found the cheaper dupes to be unreliable.
Photograph: JEFFREY MICHAEL WALCOTT/FlairFlair Pro 2 Manual Espresso MachineIf you want to add the feel of a 1950s Italian café to your kitchen, the Flair Pro 2 not only looks the part but brews a great espresso too. It's entirely human-powered. There's no cord, no need for anything other than a little pressure from your arm. As a bonus, it comes with a little carrying case if you want to take it work, camping, or wherever else the need for a shot of espresso strikes you.
The Flair is simple to use. You can see the process in the company's very helpful video guide to brewing. It's also built like a tank, and cleanup is just a matter of dumping the espresso and rinsing out the portafilter. If you want a latte or cappuccino, you'll need a separate milk frother like this one fromSecura ($43).
Photograph: AmazonDelonghi Espresso EC155If all you want is a dead-simple espresso maker and frothing wand, this De'Longhi works well considering its $100 price tag. Espresso comes out tasting as rich as you’d expect, with a healthy head of crema thanks to the 15 bars of pump pressure.
The water tank can be removed for easier cleaning, and the drip tray slides out so you can rinse off any spills.
Photograph: SubminimalSubminimal NanofoamerSometimes making a whole latte or cappuccino using an automated machine can be a time suck. Not to mention, sometimesall you really wantis frothy milk. That's where milk frothers come in. These machines beat air into milk, or milk substitutes, to get that nice creamy froth.
Most frothers make a stiff frothy foam that sits on top of the milk, which isn't great for lattes or cappuccinos. Properly textured milk is creamy, light, airy, and never stiff or separated. That's why our current favorite is the Nanofoamer from Subminimal.
A darling on Kickstarter, the Nanofoamer is now a real product. It looks like a very tiny immersion blender, which is more or less what it is. It has two distinct screens that fit over the blade: one for fine-textured milk and another for ultrafine-textured milk. The difference is subtle, but the fine filter creates milk that's abitbubblier than the ultrafine filter. The filters allow the Nanofoamer to do what baristas do with a steam wand: Ittexturesyour milk for that perfect, creamy top.
Questions and AnswersTo find the best latte and cappuccino makers, we first researched what was widely available, and stuck to models under $800. We have tested around two dozen machines for one to three months each (depending on the model), using different types of coffees, pods, and milks. We tried to live with each machine, to a degree, and use them casually, but also tested the same milk and grounds in each (where possible) to compare milk/froth ratios and taste.
Setup and cleanup were especially important, as was durability. The entire point of a device like these is to save time and energy and/or produce a drink of higher quality than can be made without it, so we didn’t recommend any products that didn’t produce tasty espressoandsave time.
Jeffrey Van Camp, Scott Gilbertson, Jaina Grey, and Adrienne So contributed to this guide.
Here's a quick way to remember the difference between alatteand acappuccino: Traditionally a latte is more milk than coffee, with no foam on top, and a cappuccino is equal parts coffee, milk, and foam. There are a lot of differing opinions on the exact ratios, but generally a cappuccino is a 2-ounce double shot of espresso (or a 1-ounce single shot), 2 ounces of steamed milk, and 2 ounces of foamed milk. For a latte you're usually looking at a single or double shot of espresso, 6(ish) ounces of steamed milk, and a bit of foam that mixes with the espresso crema as you pour in the milk.
That's why latte art is mostly brown (espresso crema) with little dashes of white (the microfoam from the milk). Using a spoon to hold back the foam until the end is a great way to make sure you don't over-foam your latte, though sometimes I (Jeffrey) just spoon the foam on afterward because foam is delicious. (I have yet to try tomake latte art.)To make a macchiato, you do a lot of the same things but in a different order. Instead of adding your steamed and frothy milk to your espresso like you do for a latte or cappuccino, with a macchiato the milk comes first. Then you add the espresso into the milk. This essentially eliminates the espresso crema and delivers a smoother drinking experience. An easy way to remember: Macchiato means “stained” in Italian, and when you pour the espresso into the milk the milk froth on top has a little coffee stain on it.
Even if you're not making espresso, the first and best thing you can do to dramatically improve your morning coffee is to buy locally roasted beans. Plug your city or region and “locally roasted coffee beans” into Google and you will be glad you did. The reason that your locally roasted coffee will taste worlds better than anything you'd buy from a major coffee roaster (like Starbucks, Illy, or Gevalia) is simple: Coffee grows in only a few regions of the world, and it starts to lose flavor the moment it's roasted.
When your local roaster buys coffee they're buying raw coffee beans. (Technically they're pits from a particular kind of cherry.) These have a pretty long shelf life in this state. They're stable, and their flavors are locked away and safe. But once you roast a coffee bean you start a countdown. The flavors we all know and love are the result of oils and volatile organic compounds in coffee being heated and released in the roasting process. Similarly to cooked veggies, those flavor compounds start to break down and start losing flavor the moment they are roasted.
Start thinking of coffee beans asa cooked food item. They're not raw potatoes; they're baked potatoes. And would you eat a baked potato that was cookedmonthsago and spent even more weeks or months in a shipping container? That's why you should buy locally roasted beans, and why you shouldneverbuy expensive coffee imported from outside your own region.
That goes double for luxury coffee brands that advertise their European origins. Coffee does not grow in Italy or France or any other part of Europe, so you will always be buying beans roasted thousands of miles away that spent an unknown amount of time in transit before they reached you. Even if you ordered a bag of killer coffee beans from (and roasted in) a coffee-producing region of the world, it's not going to arrive before those flavors start to turn. Trust me, buy from a local roaster. You won't regret it.
Ground Coffee:If you haven’t made espresso before, and you don't have access to a coffee grinder, we still recommend you buy locally roasted beans. Just ask your barista for a fine (espresso) grind. We tried a lot of preground espresso blends from popular companies likeLavazza,Gevalia, andCafé Bustelo. They were all very dark and very bitter, partially because they are all either imported or roasted in big batches and shipped all over the world. Grinding coffee is another thing that makes it start to degrade. Use your freshly ground, locally roasted beans within two weeks or you'll be drinking dark, bitter, acidic, and kind of funky coffee.
Distributor & Tamp:A lot of machines come with a plastic tamp, but few come with a proper distributor and tamp. You'll need to check the size of your portafilter (it'll say in your machine's instruction manual), but thiscombined distributor and tampis a good pick for most machines.
Stainless Steel Frothing Pitcher:If your latte maker comes with just a steam wand (like the Hamilton Beach machine on this list), you’ll want to invest in a frothing jug. This$13 Star Coffee Frothing Pitcheris nice because it has measurement scales on the inside, which is helpful if you want to get the right coffee-to-milk ratio.
WIRED COUPONSExtra savings up to $15 with TurboTax discountH&R Block Promotion: Free online tax filingShop shoes on sale for under $100 from Finish LineExtra 20% off sitewide - Dyson promo code 2022GoPro Hot Deal: $150 off the new HERO10 Black BonesSamsung coupon - 45% off select items + free shippingMore From WIREDContact© 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of ourUser AgreementandPrivacy Policy and Cookie StatementandYour California Privacy Rights.
Wiredmay earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
Ad Choices
