old id = 4020
The 10 Best Portable Coffee Makers: All-in-Ones, French Presses, and More | WIRED
2022
https://www.wired.com/gallery/best-portable-coffee-makers

To revisit this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
To revisit this article, select My Account, thenView saved storiesScott GilbertsonThe 10 Best Portable Coffee MakersFor coffee lovers,the day doesn't just begin with a good, hot cup of coffee—it seems almost impossible without it. It's not only the dose of caffeine that does the trick, although that does help. It's also the ritual that surrounds it—the smell, the sound, even the wait are all a part of how coffee gets the day started right.
Every coffee lover has their favorite method of brewing, and it's easy to feel lost without it on the go. To keep you from the depths of gas station coffee sorrow—or, worse, the complete absence of coffee—we've rounded up some of our favorite ways to brew coffee while traveling. Some of these options are also great for people who aren'tworking from home, since office kitchens are likely closed.
Be sure to check out our many otherbuying guides, including theBest Latte and Cappuccino Machines, theBest Cold-Brew Coffee Makers, and theBest Portable Espresso Makers.
Updated August 2020: We've added Planetary Design's French press. We also corrected the amount of pressure needed to qualify as an espresso machine.
Special offer for Gear readers: Get a1-year subscription to WIRED for $5 ($25 off). This includes unlimited access to WIRED.com and our print magazine (if you'd like). Subscriptions help fund the work we do every day.
If you buy something using links in our stories, we may earn a commission. This helps support our journalism.
Learn more. Please also considersubscribing to WIREDBest OverallThe Aeropress is one of the most popular coffee brewers on the market for a reason: It makes a damn fine cup of coffee. The company recently added the Aeropress Go to its lineup, which produces the same great results, but in a smaller, travel-friendly package. The Go is barely bigger than a coffee mug, incredibly lightweight, and entirely self-contained. All you need to add is coffee.
Part of the reason for the Aeropress' success is that the brewing method is infinitely customizable to your tastes. Take the three ingredients—coffee, water, and pressure—and start experimenting until you find what suits your taste. There is no wrong way to brew with an Aeropress. I do suggest starting with the method the company endorses, which you'll find included in the box, but once you've mastered it there are plenty of other ways to do it. (Try all thewinning recipes from Aeropress' annual competitions.)The Aeropress is also very forgiving; it's almost difficult to make a bad cup of coffee. You don'thaveto use some involved process. On those chilly October mornings of a late-season camping trip, you can just throw in some grounds, give it a stir, plunge, and you've got a great, hot cup of joe to warm your bones. While we like the Aeropress Go for its compact, all-in-one design, the originalAeropress ($30)is still quite portable and an option to consider.
Best All-in-OneThe Cafflano Klassic is everything you need to brew in a single, compact, relatively lightweight package. It combines a hand-mill grinder, drip kettle, and metal pour-over filter, as well as an insulated mug, in a single tumbler-shaped package. You can grind your beans, brew, and drink your coffee without needing anything but a way to boil water.
The resulting brew is some of the best pour-over coffee I've made. Getting the right grind is key, but the adjustable grinder allows you to experiment until you find something you enjoy. If even the compact design of the Klassic is too much, you can also do what I've been doing when I travel: Just bring the pour-over filter. It's made of stiff plastic and metal and has so far held up well in my carry-on bag.
Best Super Simple CoffeeDripkit's disposable pour-over coffee packets are the simplest, best-tasting pour-over coffee you're going to get on the road. Tear open the packet, set it atop your mug (or hotel room cup), and pour over boiling water. The company's own coffee wasn't strong enough for my tastes, but Dripkit partners with Portland's Stumptown Coffee Roaster to make a pour-over kit that brews an excellent cup of joe. The packets are disposable, so use these sparingly.
We've linked to the 5-pack below, but you can also opt for a 10-pack or go the subscription route and save some dough. It can get pricey, but when you want to travel light without sacrificing taste, this is the way to go.
Best for Endless PossibilitiesThe Delter Press bears some resemblance to the Aeropress, but it adds something to the equation: pressure. The Delter Press is not an espresso maker, but it does, in my experience, brew stronger than the Aeropress. I also found it possible to control the strength (taste-wise) to an almost infinite degree by varying the grind, the amount of coffee, and the amount of water. One thing I like better with the Delter is the ability to add more water without starting a new brew, something that's not possible with the Aeropress.
Delter suggests starting with a medium to fine grind, but I got enjoyable results even with a very fine espresso grind. To me, this is the best part of the Delter—it offers a wide variety of brewing possibilities, making it easy to tailor the results to your individual tastes.
Best Portable French PressThe Espro Ultralight Press is the simplest and lightest French press I tested. It also produces the least amount of sediment, a common problem in French press brewing that leaves a gritty mouthfeel every time you drink. This didn't happen with the Ultralight Press. It's double-walled and vacuum insulated, which means it will keep your hot coffee hot and iced coffee cold (about three hours on hot and five on cold in my testing). One of my favorite parts of the Espro is that with a quick rinse it can double as a water bottle when you're done with your coffee.
Best Compact DesignThe Palmpress is a press-to-brew solution that packs up small and is pretty lightweight as well. One of the nice things about it is there's nothing extra needed: no filters and no cleaning brushes. It's simple to brew, and once I got the ground dialed in (a finer ground works best, but it's worth experimenting), the result is a clean, bright flavor with almost no bitterness. This was especially true with medium roasts, which I found to be the best choice for the Palmpress. My only concern is that it does require pressure, so you'll need a sturdy mug. Flimsy hotel cups won't work.
Best Camp BrewerPlanetary Design appears to have run out of vowels, but that's OK because it has managed to turn out the best French press I've ever used. The Ovrlndr French press is solid, if a bit heavy, and unlike every other French press I've ever used, it's super easy to clean. Unscrew the bottom, dump the grounds in the compost, rinse, and you're done. As with other Planetary Design presses, the Ovrlndr features the Brü-Stop filter system. It consists of an extra-fine screen and silicone ring that creates a tight seal against the side of the mug to prevent grounds from escaping into your coffee. I still also like our former Planetary Design pick, theDouble Shot 3.0 mug ($35), but I prefer the larger capacity and easier cleaning of the Ovrlndr.
Best for Mild CoffeeThis newcomer from Wacaco has the most unusual brewing method out of all the testing I've done. It's a vacuum-pressure brewer that works by twisting. You fill a brewing chamber with coffee, the insulated container with water, and then you drop the coffee chamber into the water and let it settle to the bottom. Once the air bubbles are out, you begin twisting the brewing mechanism up and out of the mug portion (which doubles as a mug, keeping the coffee hot for hours). I highly recommendwatching the videoto get a better sense of how it works. While it may be odd, the results are great. I found it works especially well with milder coffees, picking up the subtlety of lighter roasts.
Best for BackpackingWhen you want to go ultra-light and ultra-compact but still want to brew quality coffee, GSI's collapsible pour-over coffee maker is your best choice. It weighs a mere 5 ounces and collapses down to about the size of the lid of an old coffee tin. It's also made of durable silicone.
When extended, it's around the height of your standard drip cone filter. Technically it takes #4 filters, though in a pinch you can use just about any filter (you'll need to be more careful with smaller filters). The bottom has a series of rings that mean the GSI balances well on any container, including wide-mouth water bottles,Jet-Boil pots, your standard cheap insulated camping mugs, and even my favorite drip-free, spill-freeContigo mug ($17).
Best for Frustrated Espresso LoversI have tried several dozen different ways of making coffee, and I always come back to the moka pot. The classic moka pot is theBialetti 6-cup model, which you'll find in nearly every house in Italy, but I prefer this stainless steel version. A moka pot is not quite espresso. The pressure is generally about 2 to 3 bar—to qualify as espresso you need to hit 9 bar—but it's less effort and easier to clean up. It's also not the most portable way to make coffee, which is why it's not my top pick. Still, 9 times out of 10, this is what you'll find me using at home, in campgrounds, even in hotel rooms with a portable camp stove. (Yes, I'm that guy, please don't tell the hotel manager.)Brewing SecretsThere are three basic, vital coffee brewing tips I'll impart.
Find good, fresh beans:Great coffee starts with high-quality beans. Quality beans can make even cheap brewing equipment shine. High quality means fresh. Find a local coffee roaster in your area. For testing, I used beans from Jittery Joe's Roasting Company in Athens, Georgia, specifically theWake-n-Bake blend. (Disclosure: I worked for Jittery Joe's for many years, it's a favorite of mine.)If you don't have a coffee roaster nearby, you can order beans online from reputable sellers likeBlue Bottle Coffeeor try a wide variety through a coffee subscription service likeAtlas Coffee Clubor my new favorite,Trade Coffee, which works directly with local roasters. I also recently tested alow-acid coffee from Trucup. It's made especially for people who have trouble with the acidity of regular coffee.
Get a quality grinder:Once you have good, freshly-roasted beans you need to grind them. You'll want a burr grinder, which grinds your beans evenly rather than chopping them like a blade grinder. I recently upgraded to aHario Skerton Pro ($65)hand grinder, but if you want to go electric I recommend theBaratza Encore $139. If you're not sure which is right for you, be sure to read through our guide tothe best coffee grindersExperiment:Pick one of these coffee makers and start experimenting with it at home. If you want to have reproducible results, make sure you weigh out your beans and water using a good scale like theApexstone scale with timerso you can track your pour-over pace, and take notes. It may sound nerdy, and it is, but after experimenting for a few days you'll likely find something you love. If you have notes, then you'll know how to make your perfect cup of coffee every time—no matter where you are.
WIRED COUPONSExtra savings up to $15 with TurboTax discountH&R Block Promotion: Free online tax filingShop shoes on sale for under $100 from Finish LineExtra 20% off sitewide - Dyson promo code 2022GoPro Hot Deal: $150 off the new HERO10 Black BonesSamsung coupon - 45% off select items + free shippingMore From WIREDContact© 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of ourUser AgreementandPrivacy Policy and Cookie StatementandYour California Privacy Rights.
Wiredmay earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
Ad Choices
