old id = 544
Research Associate - Subramaniam Lab | Nature Careers
2022
https://www.nature.com/naturecareers/job/research-associate-subramaniam-lab-the-university-of-british-columbia-ubc-757762

Research Associate - Subramaniam LabThe University of British Columbia (UBC)Vancouver, CanadaResearch Associate, Subramaniam LabDepartment of Biochemistry & Molecular BiologyThe University of British ColumbiaThe University of British Columbia’s (UBC) Faculty of Medicine invites applications for a Research Associate to join an interdisciplinary translational research program in our Canada Excellence Research Chair Program led by Dr. Sriram Subramaniam. The long-term mission of the program is to explore frontiers in structural biology and drug design using cryo electron microscopy (cryo-EM), with the goal of accelerating the development of effective therapeutic agents. Our research combines novel technologies for high-resolution 3D imaging with computation and machine learning as well as cell and molecular biology. More details about our program can be found athttp://electron.med.ubc.ca.
The successful candidate will have a Ph.D. in structural biology, biophysics, computer science or a related multidisciplinary field, with at least 5 years of research experience in cryo-EM and demonstrated expertise in:Image-analysis methodology development for high-resolution single-particle EM data processing, and proficient in C/C++/Python/Matlab programming for algorithm implementation onCPU/GPUhybrid computing clusters.
State-of-the-art methods for cryo-EM specimen preparation.
Hands-on experience in single particle cryo-EM and tomography data processingHands-on experience with operation of modern cryo-EM instruments such as the Titan Krios and Glacios.
The applicant should be highly self-motivated and demonstrate the ability to work independently, conceive, initiate, organize, and manage research projects. Excellent verbal and written communication and interpersonal skills are a necessity, as well as the ability to work in a team environment. The applicant must have a strong research publication record and proven track record of collaborative research, and broad expertise in experimental and computational aspects of cryo-EM.
Specific responsibilities will include:A. Supporting experimental and computational aspects of the cryo-EM operations of the research program in a team setting.
B. Developing and undertaking research projects that will improve the biological understanding of cancer and other diseases of critical importance (infectious diseases, neurological diseases) and accelerate the development of effective therapeutic agents. Initial projects will target the following areas:C. Participation in operation and management of cryo-EM instrumentation and computing infrastructure of theCERCprogram.
D. Assisting lab members in the program with manuscript preparation, reports, and communications related to the projects underway in the laboratory.
Applications should include a letter outlining the applicant’s research, strengths and experiences relevant to the position requirements, a detailed curriculum vitae and the names of three references to:Program in Cryo-EM Drug DesignEmail:cryoem.lab@ubc.caSubject Line: Research Associate PositionThis posting is for theUBCVancouvercampus in British Columbia, Canada.
Please refer to reference numberNC-56018during correspondence about this position.
Equity and diversity are essential to academic excellence. An open and diverse community fosters the inclusion of voices that have been underrepresented or discouraged. We encourage applications from members of groups that have been marginalized on any grounds enumerated under the B.C. Human Rights Code, including sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, racialization, disability, political belief, religion, marital or family status, age, and/or status as a First Nation, Metis, Inuit, or Indigenous person.
All qualified candidates are encouraged to apply; however Canadians and permanent residents will be given priority.
AboutUBCThe University of British Columbia is a global centre for research and teaching, consistently ranked among the top 20 public universities in the world. Since 1915, UBC’s entrepreneurial spirit has embraced innovation and challenged the status quo.
UBCencourages its students, staff and faculty to challenge convention, lead discovery and explore new ways of learning. AtUBC, bold thinking is given a place to develop into ideas that can change the world.
About UBC’s Faculty of MedicineOur Vision: To Transform Health for Everyone.
Ranked among the world’s top medical schools with the fifth-largest MD enrollment in North America, theUBCFaculty of Medicine is a leader in both the science and the practice of medicine. Across British Columbia, more than 11,000 faculty and staff are training the next generation of doctors, health care professionals and scientists, making remarkable discoveries, and helping to create the pathways to better health for our communities at home and around the world.
The Faculty of Medicine – comprised of approximately 2,200 administrative support, technical/research and management and professional staff, as well approximately 650 full-time academic and more than 9,000 clinical faculty members – is composed of 19 academic basic science and/or clinical departments, three schools, and 24 research centres and institutes. Together with its University and Health Authority partners, the Faculty delivers innovative programs and conducts research in the areas of health and life sciences. Faculty, staff and trainees are located at university campuses, clinical academic campuses in hospital settings and other regionally based centres across the province.
About VancouverVancouver is a dynamic, cosmopolitan and progressive city, consistently ranked as one of the top cities to live in the world. Canada’s third largest city has it all: sea, parks, mountains, beaches, and four seasons per year, including beautiful summers and mild, wet winters with snow in the mountains. It’s the perfect backdrop to your academic research.
QualificationPhDJob TypeFaculty MemberDisciplineBiomedicineHoursFull TimeDurationFixed TermApply with CV and Cover LetterPositionResearch Associate - Subramaniam LabSend me an email confirmation© 2022 Springer Nature Limited. All rights reserved.
