old id = 4121
New Partners Bring Diversity of Expertise to Partnership on AI
2022
https://partnershiponai.org/new-partners-bring-diversity-of-expertise-to-partnership-on-ai%ef%bf%bc

Share/BlogNew Partners Bring Diversity of Expertise to Partnership on AI￼PAI StaffContinuing our mission of bringing together diverse voices to ensure responsible development and deployment of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) technologies, Partnership on AI (PAI) is proud to welcome six new Nonprofit Partner organizations:AI and Faith,The Associated Press,Hacks/Hackers, theMontreal AI Ethics Institute, theSchwartz Reisman Institute, and theStarling Lab for Data Integrity. These new Partners (which include academic institutions, grassroots organizations, and a leading news organization) bring unique areas of expertise to our multi-stakeholder community.
The six new Partners joining PAI bring our global reach to over 100 Partner organizations across five continents. We are excited to add these Partners and look forward to their contributions to our work and strengthening the Partnership’s impact.
“From leadership in technology, governance, and ethics to influential initiatives that improve news and online media, I am so happy to welcome these new Partners to our diverse and global community,” said Rebecca Finlay, CEO of Partnership on AI. “I look forward to the new perspectives that AI & Faith, The Associated Press, Hacks/Hackers, the Montreal AI Ethics Institute, the Schwartz Reisman Institute, and the Starling Lab will bring to the PAI community as we co-create solutions so that AI is developed to center people first.”Remarks from New Partners“We are thrilled to join Partnership on AI’s partner network. The PAI community shares our vision for a future with AI that is equitable, accountable, and transparent for all. We believe that, with careful thought and continuing ethical engagement, many AI-powered technologies can and will be a powerful force for good. We are eager to continue this work with the PAI community to see that vision become a reality.” –David Brenner, Executive Director, AI and Faith“We’re glad to be part of a coalition that is thinking about the ethical implications of AI and journalism, and helping to steer future guidelines for tools that incorporate automation and AI for use in journalism.” –Gianluca D’Aniello, SVP and Chief Technology Officer, The Associated Press“As an international grassroots organization that connects journalists, technologists, and researchers to collaborate on shared projects, with an emphasis on technology’s impact on information quality, Hacks/Hackers is pleased to join with PAI in advancing issues of media integrity online, such as developing best practices for AI to have a positive impact on the global information ecosystem.” –Jennifer 8. Lee, Board Member, Hacks/Hackers“The Montreal AI Ethics Institute is delighted to be a part of PAI! There is a very strong degree of alignment and synergy between the work that PAI fosters and our mission to democratize AI ethics literacy. In particular, we’re excited to work with all partners towards advancing our collective understanding of the nuances in designing, developing, and deploying AI systems for prosocial uses. A collaborative approach working together with experts from diverse backgrounds and experiences across industry, government, and civil society is the foundation through which we can put forward meaningful technical, policy, and organizational measures for ethical, safe, and inclusive AI systems. The work at PAI is a tremendous opportunity to bring forth actionable methods and mechanisms and we are honored to be a part of this journey in helping to advance our collective missions to create resources that will help us move from principles to practice.” –Abhishek Gupta, Founder and Principal Researcher, Montreal AI Ethics Institute“Schwartz Reisman Institute’s partnership with PAI is born out of a similar mission, to bring diverse voices together so that developments in powerful technologies like AI advance positive outcomes for people and society. Through SRI’s mission we hope to inspire, and draw inspiration from, all the work PAI is doing under their five programs.” –Gillian K. Hadfield, Director, Schwartz Reisman Institute“We are excited to join forces with the innovative teams at PAI to explore the future of digital trust as we all push into the frontier of Web 3.0. Our interdisciplinary reasearch will develop new cryptographic methods to authenticate original digital content and track how this content is enhanced and manipulated by AI-driven tools. Today, this kind of digital provenance is nascent and may seem cumbersome. But tomorrow it will be a critical tool for digital literacy, as users will need help to reconcile how real and sythentic media becomes part of our daily lives.” –Jonathan Dotan, Founding Director, Starling Lab for Data Integrity at Stanford and USCAbout our New PartnersAI and Faithseeks to engage the world in the moral and ethical issues around artificial intelligence and related technologies by connecting, encouraging and equipping persons with faith perspectives on AI in the technology sector, the global faith community and AI influencers through our expert community and membership network.
The Associated Pressis an independent global news organization dedicated to factual reporting. Founded in 1846, AP today remains the most trusted source of fast, accurate, unbiased news in all formats and the essential provider of the technology and services vital to the news business. More than half the world’s population sees AP journalism every day.
Hacks/Hackersis an international grassroots organization that connects journalists, technologists, and researchers to collaborate on shared projects, with an emphasis on technology’s impact on information quality. Hacks/Hackers collaborations and partnerships include advancing issues of media integrity online, such as developing best practices for AI to have a positive impact on the global information ecosystem.
TheMontreal AI Ethics Institute(MAIEI) is an international, non-profit research institute with a mission to democratize AI ethics literacy. We believe that elevating the level of discourse in AI ethics is the necessary foundation to develop meaningful technical, policy, and organizational measures to address the adverse societal impacts from the unethical design, development, and deployment of AI systems. We take action via community building, education via effective and clear science communication, and fundamental research to advance our mission. We work with governments and multilateral organizations around the world serving as expert advisors to formulate strategic and tactical approaches to ensure AI is used for prosocial purposes. Our flagship publications including the State of AI Ethics Report and the AI Ethics Brief that share the latest in research and reporting in the domain. More information on our work athttps://montrealethics.aiTheSchwartz Reisman Institute for Technology and Society(SRI) is a research and solutions hub within the University of Toronto. SRI convenes world-class expertise and diverse perspectives from universities, government, industry, and beyond to develop new modes of thinking about powerful technologies and their role in what it means to be human in the 21st century. At SRI, we are defining what’s possible, determining what’s at stake, and devising implementable solutions to make sure technologies like AI are effective, safe, fair, and beneficial—for everyone.
TheStarling Lab for Data Integrityis an academic research lab at the USC Shoah Foundation and Stanford’s Department of Electrical Engineering. Starling is innovating with the latest cryptographic methods and decentralized web protocols to meet the technical and ethical challenges of authenticating and establishing trust in digital content© 2022 Partnership on AI | All Rights Reserved
