old id = 4179
PhD candidate for the development of instrumentation for
2022
https://www.nature.com/naturecareers/job/phd-candidate-for-the-development-of-instrumentation-for-highresolution-optoacoustic-whole-animal-imaging-fmx-helmholtz-munich-758636

PhD candidate for the development of instrumentation for high-resolution Optoacoustic whole animal imaging (f/m/x)Helmholtz MunichNeuherberg (bei München), GermanyArea of research:PHDThesis: Discover personalized medical solutions for environmentally triggered diseases to promote a healthier society in a rapidly changing world.
The Institute of Biological and Medical Imaging (IBMI) atHelmholtz Munichand the Chair of Biological Imaging (CBI) at the Technical University of Munich (TUM) are an integrated, multi-disciplinary research structure and form the cornerstone of a rapidly expanding bioengineering ecosystem in Munich, Germany.
IBMIscientists develop next-generation imaging and sensing methods to measure previously inaccessible properties of living systems, hence, catalyzing breakthroughs in biology, medicine and the environment.
We now seek a highly qualified and motivatedPh.D. candidate (f/m/x)to drive the development of a novel type of Optoacoustic in vivo imaging system with superior resolution while maintaining penetra-tion depth of several millimeters – going beyond state-of-the-art multiphoton and bioluminescence imaging in life-sciences alike.
PhD candidate for the development of instrumentation for high-resolution Optoacoustic whole animal imaging (f/m/x)101562Full timeNeuherberg near MunichPhDYour missionOptoacoustic imaging (e.g.
MSOTandRSOM) combines the versatile contrast of optical imaging with the deep penetration of ultrasound imaging. These characteristics give optoacoustic imaging a competitive edge over other imaging methods currently applied in biology and medicine.
The successful candidate will develop an instrumentation that links the high resolution of raster scanning optoacoustic mesoscopy (RSOM) with pulsed diode powered excitation and locked-in detection to allow obtaining cellular resolution in several millimeters’ depth in the live animal.
The project is a joined effort with other renowned laboratories from France, the Netherlands and Switzerland, that contribute for example AI based data analysis as well as custom electronics and ultrasound-transducer development. Hence the successful candidate will not only develop instrumentation but also function as the linking hub between the partner groups – resulting in truly international and interdisciplinary work.
Your qualificationsThe successful applicant must have the following:What we offer youscientific training at Graduate Schoolwork-life balanceflexible working hours & time off in lieu30 days annual leaveon-site health management servicecareer consultationmobile workon-site nurserycompany pension scheme discounted public transport ticketMunich, with its numerous lakes and its vicinity to the Alps, is considered to be one of the cities with the best quality of life worldwide. With its first-class universities and world-leading research institutions it offers an intellectually stimulating environment.
This position also provides the opportunity for you to build specialist knowledge and collect significant professional experience, both of which will help advance your scientific career.
Remuneration and social benefits are based on the collective wage agreement for public-sector employees at federal level (EG 13 65% TV EntgO Bund). The position is (initially) limited to three years, but under certain circumstances an extension can be arranged.
To promote diversity, we welcome applications from talented people regardless of gender, cultural background, nationality, ethnicity, sexual identity, physical abilities, religion and age. Qualified applicants with physical disabilities will be given preference.
If you have obtained a university degree abroad, we require further documents from you regarding the recognition of the degree.
Interested?If you have further questions, simply contactDr. Andre-Christian Stiel, 089 3187-3972,who will be happy to be of assistance.
Helmholtz Zentrum MünchenDeutsches Forschungszentrum für Gesundheit und Umwelt (GmbH)Institute of Biological and Medical ImagingIngolstädter Landstraße 185764 OberschleißheimTotal E-Quality Award for excellent gender equality policy for women and men: Helmholtz Munich is particularly committed to promoting professional equality between women and men. It therefore aims to increase the proportion of the underrepresented sex in the respective field. Helmholtz Munich is part of the Helmholtz Association, Germany’s largest scientific organization. Altogether 43.000 people currently work in its 18 scientific-technical and biological-medical research centers. The Association’s annual budget amounts to around 5 billion Euros.
This research center is part of the Helmholtz Association of German Research Centers. With more than 42,000 employees and an annual budget of over € 5 billion, the Helmholtz Association is Germany’s largest scientific organisation.
Please apply via recruiter’s website.
Quote Reference: 15163630QualificationMastersJob TypePhD StudentshipDisciplineLife ScienceHoursFull TimeDurationFixed Term© 2022 Springer Nature Limited. All rights reserved.
