old id = 4202
Babyl – Rwanda's Digital Healthcare Provider
2022
http://babyl.rw

Welcome to BabylThe largest digital health service provider in Rwanda.
2,500,000+Registered Users2,900,000+Consultations PerformedOur MissionBabyl believes it is possible to put an accessible and affordable health care service in the hands of every person on earth.
How? By combining the ever-growing computing power of machines with the best medical expertise of humans to create a comprehensive, immediate and personalised health service and making it universally available.
Quick Access to GPs and NursesDid you know that many medical conditions can be diagnosed without needing to visit a physical health facility? Digital health can be a convenient way to access healthcare.
Booking an appointment is easy. Simply dial *811# from your phone, book an appointment, and a doctor will call you at a scheduled time.
Prescriptions on your phoneAfter the consultation, prescription codes are sent directly to you via SMS code, and can be redeemed from your usual health facility.
Laboratory TestsLaboratory tests codes are also sent by our doctors via SMS code. Lab tests can be completed at any partner clinic, health center or laboratory.
Artificial IntelligenceBabyl has introduced an AI triage platform with the Babyl patient journey which aims to improve the efficiency of the process and the quality of questions asked to patients and provide standardized clinical notes to be used by other clinicians.
Babylon’s AI has been fully localized to the Rwanda context. Our approach to localization includes epidemiology, language, care pathways and culture.
Quotes"We are delighted to have a partnership with Babyl who will work alongside all our health institutions and RSSB to deliver this innovative digital healthcare service. Increasing access to our doctors will help stop self-diagnosis & self-medication which lead to longer term complications. With the reduced burden on health centers and other medical institutions, our medical professionals will also now spend more time & resources on serious medical cases, further increasing the quality of healthcare delivery across the country.""Babyl’s investment in Rwanda contributes Rwanda’s National Strategy for Transformation, particularly ensuring access to quality health for all; and establishing Rwanda as a globally competitive knowledge-based economy by reinforcing partnerships to build skills with practical application in health.""The prospect of reducing the burden on government and private health as well increasing access to quality healthcare is a key driver on a national agenda level.""With their technology, I believe girls won’t be shy to ask questions about their health, especially those that are normally perceived as embarrassing by society.""RSSB thrives to increasingly deliver a comprehensive social security package that addresses all social security needs of all Rwandans. Digital healthcare is a significant step towards ensuring that all our members can conveniently access doctors without fear of loss of income or worry about travel to a medical institution. Early intervention with eased access to healthcare will also reduce the burden on our universal healthcare scheme."BabylPeoplePressLegalFollow us:© Babylon 2022 - All rights reserved
