old id = 4312
DW Global Media Forum | DW
2022
https://www.dw.com/en/what-is-germanys-dual-education-system-and-why-do-other-countries-want-it/a-42902504/en/gmf/s-43101535

Visit the new DW websiteTake a look at thebetaversion of dw.com. We're not done yet! Your opinion can help us make it better.
We use cookies to improve our service for you. You can find more information in our data protection declaration.
Click here to choose your ticket now17.05.2022Join us at the 15th DW Global Media Forum in Bonn, Germany or online on June 20 and 21.
Shaping tomorrow, now: The DW Global Media Forum 2022On June 20 and 21, the Global Media Forum explores opportunities to foster resilient journalism in times of crisis. Learn more here and join us in Bonn or online.
DW honors Ukrainian journalists Maloletka and Chernov for Mariupol reportingRisking their lives, Evgeniy Maloletka and Mstyslav Chernov documented Russia's siege of the Ukrainian port city of Mariupol. The journalists are the 2022 recipients of DW's Freedom of Speech Award.
Social media trends in 2022Post COVID-19, here are some developing trends we're paying particular attention to this year.
Start-up contest @GMF: Where entrepreneurial minds meet and competeThe start-up contest is an exciting part of the DW Global Media Forum. Entrepreneurs from around the world are welcome to pitch their ideas to a global audience, develop their skills and compete for the first place.
Sham Jaff on bias in Western mediaThe journalist on her newsletter in which she highlights news from regions underrepresented in Western media | GMF talkA Pakistani journalist and the power of local journalismWhat impact can local journalism have? Meet Pakistani journalist Fayaz Uddin.
Futurist Angela Oguntala | GMF talkIs "slowth" in the newsroom better than ever faster technological progress?Understanding AI with Stuart Russell | GMF talkShould you be scared of AI? And is “it” really as powerful as we kinda all believe it is?Pratap Bhanu Mehta | GMF talkIndian political scientist Pratap Bhanu Mehta talked to us about the democratic process.
More videosSham Jaff on bias in Western mediaA Pakistani journalist and the power of local journalismFuturist Angela Oguntala | GMF talkUnderstanding AI with Stuart Russell | GMF talkPratap Bhanu Mehta | GMF talkArts dialog: Plunging into the future with Beethoven, Fela Kuti and Germanic legendsHow can arts and culture shape a more pluralistic and inclusive future? What can people from opposite ends of the globe learn from each other? DW Global Media Forum's new format "Arts dialog" wants to find out.
The power of global start-up ecosystemsBuilding on the success of the 2021 DW Global Media Forum start-up contest, we set out to explore start-up success stories by focusing on ecosystems around the world, where innovators seek solutions to big social issues.
Henriette Löwisch: Reporting starts with questioning own assumptionsHow can journalism schools learn to cater to the needs of future journalism? The director of the German Journalism School shares her views on impartiality, diversity and the role of journalism for civilized discourse.
Troll farms | GMF compactLet's explore the dead giveaway signs of state-run troll farms being at work.
How to report on Big Pharma | GMF compactHow can journalists watch out for unconscious bias?NFTs explained | GMF compactWhat is a non-fungible token and how does it work?What’s so bad about algorithms? | GMF compactAlgorithms are what makes social media function the way we know it. But what are they exactly?More videosTroll farms | GMF compactHow to report on Big Pharma | GMF compactNFTs explained | GMF compactWhat’s so bad about algorithms? | GMF compactThe DW Global Media Forum offers a unique interdisciplinary platform for media professionals as well as decision-makers from politics, civil society, culture, education, business and science from all over the world to get together and to learn from each other as part of an intercultural exchange since 2008.
On June 20 and 21, 2022, we meet again to shape the future of journalism, together.
Get your ticket now and join us at the World Conference Center in Bonn, Germany or online!Introducing the DW Global Media ForumFor 15 years, the interdisciplinary media conference has brought together media professionals from around the world.
The place made for mindsLearn more about the DW Global Media Forum, the international media summit hosted annually by Germany’s international public broadcaster.
Our fellowship programSince 2012, the Global Media Forum fellowship program has welcomed more than 1,000 people, journalists to social entrepreneurs, from all over the world.
Your questionsHelpful answers to your questions about the Global Media Forum.
Our newsletterSubscribe now and stay connected to the Global Media Forum.
DW Global Media Forum: More than a decade of top speakers"In democratic societies where we are open to new developments, we have to keep thinking carefully about what freedom really means to us."Angela Merkel - Federal Chancellor of Germany (2021)DW Global Media Forum: More than a decade of top speakers"We will continue to do our best, because I believe we do make a difference. That's our way of fighting back: more journalism."Maria Ressa - Nobel Peace Prize laureate 2021, co-founder and CEO of the news website Rappler, Philippines (2020)DW Global Media Forum: More than a decade of top speakers"Independent fact-based journalism has never been as important as it is today."Armin Laschet - Minister-President of the State of North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany (2021)DW Global Media Forum: More than a decade of top speakers"We live in a microwave generation. Everyone wants everything too fast, but we have to put in the work."Leymah Gbowee - Activist and Nobel Peace Prize laureate, Liberia (2021)DW Global Media Forum: More than a decade of top speakers"The word 'disruption' has to be recycled. The idea of a local newspaper is disruptive. The idea to have iPhones and be on the internet is reactive."Timothy Snyder - Historian, Yale University, USA (2021)DW Global Media Forum: More than a decade of top speakers"It's a pity that when our demonstrations, because of violence and torture, disappeared from the streets, journalists lost a bit of interest."Svetlana Tikhanovskaya - Belarusian opposition leader (2021)DW Global Media Forum: More than a decade of top speakers"What we want in journalism is not optimism and not cynicism, but accuracy."Steven Pinker - Cognitive psychologist, Harvard University, USA (2021)DW Global Media Forum: More than a decade of top speakers"They kicked me out of Iran, but I am there every day through social media."Masih Alinejad - Women's rights campaigner, Iran (2020)DW Global Media Forum: More than a decade of top speakers"We need ombudsmen for algorithms. We need some insight into them if we are to maintain our democratic political system."Anne Applebaum - Pulitzer Prize winner, USA (2020)DW Global Media Forum: More than a decade of top speakers"Algorithms pick up on negative feelings such as fear and accentuate them. This has led to the creation of fear-based politics all over the world."Jaron Lanier - Computer scientist and author, USA (2019)DW Global Media Forum: More than a decade of top speakers"It's difficult to form a relationship with a politician who's acting like a tyrant. What questions can you ask when this person can put you in jail?"Can Dündar - Former editor-in-chief of "Cumhuriyet", Turkey (2019)DW Global Media Forum: More than a decade of top speakers"Do governments truly have the capacity to understand emerging technologies? Communication regulations from the 1970s are not going to work for 2019."Juliana Rotich - Tech entrepreneur, Kenya (2019)DW Global Media Forum: More than a decade of top speakers"We need to address the daunting challenges to development by engaging with multiple centers seeking balance rather than overreliance on one country."Hamid Karzai - Former President of Afghanistan (2018)DW Global Media Forum: More than a decade of top speakers"I believe that in the digital age, public broadcasters have a more important role to play than ever before."Tom Buhrow - Director General of Westdeutscher Rundfunk (WDR), Germany (2018)DW Global Media Forum: More than a decade of top speakers"If we truly believe that journalism is important to our society, we should enlist our fellow citizens and involve them as a community service."Dr. Ann Hollifield - News and media researcher, USA (2017)DW Global Media Forum: More than a decade of top speakers"I hope people in the West can distinguish between the Kremlin and Russia; Putin and Russia."Mikhail Khodorkovsky - Founder of Open Russia, Russia (2017)DW Global Media Forum: More than a decade of top speakers“As politicians, we need to keep and defend the values we deem constitutive for our democracy in the analog world in our digital lives, too.”Monika Grütters, Federal Government Commissionar for Culture and the Media, Germany (2015)DW Global Media Forum: More than a decade of top speakers"The freedom of the press is facing pressure on a global scale, not just abroad. I want to encourage journalists: Democracy needs you all urgently."Frank-Walter Steinmeier - Federal President of Germany (2014)DW Global Media Forum: More than a decade of top speakers"We should all be protected by the same press freedom."Sarah Harrison - British journalist and WikiLeaks section editor, UK (2014)DW Global Media Forum: More than a decade of top speakers"Power must be in the hands of the wealth of the nation."Noam Chomsky - Linguist, philosopher, cognitive scientist, historian, social critic and political activist, USA (2013)DW Global Media Forum: More than a decade of top speakers"Journalists must see themselves as members of a big family and stick together."Shirin Ebadi - Lawyer, former judge and human rights activists, founder of the Defenders of Human Rights Center, Iran (2008)Bringing minds together since 2008Explore the Global Media Forum journey one year at a time.
Global Media Forum 2021Global Media Forum 2020Global Media Forum 2019Global Media Forum 2018Global Media Forum 2017Global Media Forum 2016Global Media Forum 2015Global Media Forum 2014Global Media Forum 2013Global Media Forum 2012Global Media Forum 2011Global Media Forum 2010Bringing minds together since 2008Since 2015, the DW Freedom of Speech Award has honored a media person or initiative that has shown outstanding promotion of freedom rights.
© 2022 Deutsche Welle |Privacy Policy|Accessibility Statement|Legal notice|Contact|Mobile version
