old id = 4423
US government clients unaffected by Viasat cyberattack
2022
https://www.c4isrnet.com/cyber/2022/03/17/us-government-clients-unaffected-by-viasat-cyberattack

CyberUS government clients unaffected by Viasat cyberattackWASHINGTON — A cyberattack that disrupted Viasat internet services in Ukraine and other parts of Europe did not affect U.S. government customers, the company said March 16.
The California-basedsatellite giantand defense contractor further said the attack did not compromise customer data and did not damage its core network infrastructure and gateways. As of March 11, its KA-SAT network had been stabilized and the company was working to restore services.
“We continue to make significant progress and multiple resolution efforts have been completed while others are underway,” the company said in a statement. “Certain customer modems are receiving over-the-air updates while other customer modems will be replaced.”The February cyberattack — described as “deliberate, isolated and external” by a Viasat spokesperson — roughly coincided with Russia’sbloody invasionof Ukraine. NetBlocks on March 15 said the Viasat attack was “one of several incidents observed” as Russia rolled in.
The Ukrainian government as of March 16 tallied more than 3,000 distributed denial-of-service attacks on its systems, including a record 275 in one day. The tactic, often referred to as DDoS, floods a website or network with traffic, rendering it useless.
“Russia’s aggression, the intensity of cyber-attacks against Ukraine’s vital information infrastructure hasn’t decreased,” the State Service of Special Communication and Information Protection of Ukrainesaid in a bulletin. “While Russian missiles are targeting physical infrastructure of communication and broadcasting, Russian hackers are targeting our information infrastructure.”Moscow has historically denied such operations.
Reuterson March 11reported Western intelligence teams, including the U.S. National Security Agency, are probing the attack, which has not been attributed to any one player. Reutersdescribed the blitz as possibly “one of the most significant wartime cyberattacks publicly disclosed so far.”Viasat told C4ISRNET on March 16 it is working with “law enforcement, government partners” and its “third-party cybersecurity firm.”Viasat furnishes satellite and networking capabilities, among other goods, to the U.S. military. In January 2020, for example, the company announced it had won a$90 million Air Force contractto provide specialized Link 16 radios.
Colin Demarest is a reporter at C4ISRNET, where he covers military networks, cyber and IT. Colin previously covered the Department of Energy and its NNSA — namely Cold War cleanup and nuclear weapons development — for a daily newspaper in South Carolina. Colin is also an award-winning photographer.
Share:More In CyberPentagon making progress on cybersecurity amid challenges, watchdog says“Safeguarding federal computer systems has been a longstanding concern,” the GAO wrote in a May 19 memo to congressional committees, noting cybersecurity has been “on our high-risk list since 1997.”GEOINTUS and allies blame Russia for Viasat hack ahead of Ukraine invasionWhile the U.S. and others did not tie the digital assault to any one specific element of the Russian government, Estonia pinned the blame on Russia’s infamous intelligence directorate, known as GRU.
US cyber squad boosts Lithuanian defenses amid Russian threatSuch operations offer a “key asymmetric advantage that our adversaries don’t have,” according to Army Maj. Gen. Joe Hartman, the Cyber National Mission Force commander.
NSA cyber boss seeks to discourage vigilante hacking against Russia“This certainly isn’t going to make the State Department discussions with Russia of ‘you need to hold your people accountable’ any easier.”Pentagon finds hundreds of cyber vulnerabilities among contractorsThe campaign launched in April 2021 with 14 participating companies and 141 publicly accessible assets to probe. Interest quickly ballooned; 41 companies and nearly 350 assets were eventually admitted.
Featured VideoScanning for fraudulent chips and a Russian chopper deal falls through | Defense DollarsKeynote: Lt. Gen. Michael Groen'We weren't born digital': The obstacles to getting AI to the battlefieldOvercoming the barriers to using artificial intelligenceTrending NowWhy Latin American partners need a better way to share intel than WhatsAppSpecial ops leader issues warning over information warfare capabilities, fundingCyberattacks don’t win warsSpace Development Agency approves design for satellites that can track hypersonic weaponsSpace Development Agency to launch next missile warning satellites earlier than expectedC4ISRNet © 2022C4ISRNet © 2022Terms of UseGet UsContact UsAbout Us
