old id = 4748
Clinical research
2022
https://www.nature.com/collections/eejddfjdhe

Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript.
AdvertisementCollectionClinical researchNature Communications is interested in publishing high-quality clinical research in all areas of clinical medicine. In this collection, which is curated by the Life Sciences Editors at Nature Communications, we highlight some of the latest clinical research papers published in the journal. The collection is divided into four areas (COVID-19, Cancer, Physiology and disease, Microbiology and infectious diseases). With this collection, we aim to reiterate the interest of Nature Communications in publishing clinical research, including but not limited to interventional and observational clinical trials, as well as ad hoc analyses of published trials. This collection is accompanied by aneditorial, where we clarify ourguide to authorsfor submission of clinical research papers, and by aQ&Awith Professor Ruth Plummer on the design and reporting of interventional clinical trials. The collection will be regularly updated with new content selected by our editorial team.
We now also welcome submissions of manuscripts reporting the results of clinical studies. All manuscripts will be considered according to oureditorial policies for clinical researchfollowing peer review. Submissions are welcome on a rolling basis. Unfortunately, we cannot guarantee that any individual paper will be included in the desired collection.
COVID-19Comparative analysis of COVID-19 vaccine responses and third booster dose-induced neutralizing antibodies against Delta and Omicron variantsVaccination shows efficacy in protecting from COVID-19, but regime and dosing optimization is still ongoing. Here the authors show that BNT162b2, mRNA-1273, or their combination with ChAdOx1 induces similar antibody responses, and those receiving three doses of BNT162b2 induce neutralizing antibodies against the Omicron variant.
Comparative effectiveness over time of the mRNA-1273 (Moderna) vaccine and the BNT162b2 (Pfizer-BioNTech) vaccineIn this retrospective cohort study, Islam et al. estimate the effectiveness of two mRNA-based COVID-19 vaccines in over 3.5 million fully vaccinated individuals and find no differences in vaccine effectiveness for protection against hospitalization, ICU admission, or death/hospice transfer.
Glycaemic control is associated with SARS-CoV-2 breakthrough infections in vaccinated patients with type 2 diabetesIn this study, Marfella et al. show that patients with diabetes and poor glycaemic control have a blunted response to COVID-19 vaccine and are more prone to develop breakthrough infections, with further analysis suggesting smoking and male sex as potential risk factors to get COVID-19 despite vaccination.
Safety and serum distribution of anti-SARS-CoV-2 monoclonal antibody MAD0004J08 after intramuscular injectionMonoclonal antibodies (mAbs) are a potential therapeutic option for treatment of COVID-19. Here, the authors report safety and pharmacokinetics of an intramuscularly injected mAb (MAD0004J08) during the first 30 days of a phase 1 clinical study.
Modeling the disruption of respiratory disease clinical trials by non-pharmaceutical COVID-19 interventionsA computational mechanistic viral infection model and trial simulation advocates for adaptation of respiratory disease clinical trials whose chances of success and interpretability are being degraded under COVID-19 pandemic mitigation measures.
Modeling of waning immunity after SARS-CoV-2 vaccination and influencing factorsThis study investigates the dynamics of immunological markers after first SARS-CoV-2 vaccination dose in cohort of healthcare professionals in Denmark. Natural infection was associated with higher antibody responses, and IgG decline varied by age, sex, T-cell response, previous infection, and interval between vaccine doses.
Comparative effectiveness and safety of homologous two-dose ChAdOx1 versus heterologous vaccination with ChAdOx1 and BNT162b2Different homologous and heterologous vaccination regimens have been used for COVID-19. Here the authors show in a cohort analysis from Catalonia that heterologous vaccination with ChAdOx1 followed by BNT162b2 has better vaccine effectiveness than two doses of ChAdOx1.
Comparative effectiveness of the BNT162b2 and ChAdOx1 vaccines against Covid-19 in people over 50Several vaccines have been approved for Covid-19 and effectiveness data could guide public health decisions on vaccine usage. Here, the authors compare effectiveness of BNT162b2 and ChAdOx1 vaccines in people over 50 in the UK and find that BNT162b2 confers lower risk of infection and hospitalization.
De novo emergence of a remdesivir resistance mutation during treatment of persistent SARS-CoV-2 infection in an immunocompromised patient: a case reportHere, the authors identify and validate the emergence of a SARS-CoV-2 resistance mutation to Remdesivir, associated with virological recrudesce in an immunocompromised patient with persistent COVID-19.
Antibody decay, T cell immunity and breakthrough infections following two SARS-CoV-2 vaccine doses in inflammatory bowel disease patients treated with infliximab and vedolizumabVaccination is effective in protecting from COVID-19. Here the authors report immune responses and breakthrough infections in twice-vaccinated patients receiving anti-TNF treatments for inflammatory bowel disease, and find dampened vaccine responses that implicate the need of adapted vaccination schedules for these patients.
Population antibody responses following COVID-19 vaccination in 212,102 individualsThe authors present results from the REACT-2 study, a series of cross-sectional community surveys during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic in England. They measure antibodies by self-administered lateral flow tests and describe antibody positivity by time since vaccination, age, sex, co-morbidities, infection history, and vaccine type.
Humoral and cellular responses after a third dose of SARS-CoV-2 BNT162b2 vaccine in patients with lymphoid malignanciesVaccination is effective in preventing severe COVID-19 symptoms. Here the authors monitor patients with hematopoietic malignancy to find the third dose of the mRNA vaccine, BNT162b2, only boosts the humoral immunity in those showing responses to 2nd dose vaccination but can induce an independent T-cell response in a fraction of seronegative patients.
A phase 2 single center open label randomised control trial for convalescent plasma therapy in patients with severe COVID-19Convalescent plasma therapy (CPT) is used to treat patients with Covid-19, but evidence for clinical benefit from clinical trials is divergent. Here the authors report in that CPT treatment does not affect mortality in patients with severe Covid-19 in phase 2 single center open label randomised controlled trial.
A randomized study to evaluate safety and immunogenicity of the BNT162b2 COVID-19 vaccine in healthy Japanese adultsHere the authors provide the interim analysis of an ongoing phase 1/2 study of the BNT162b2 vaccine in healthy Japanese adults. They report mainly mild to moderate local reactions and no serious adverse events as well as good antibody induction one month after the second dose.
A single dose of ChAdOx1 Chik vaccine induces neutralizing antibodies against four chikungunya virus lineages in a phase 1 clinical trialChikungunya virus (CHIKV) is a reemerging mosquito-borne virus that has caused outbreaks in various regions of the world. Here the authors present safety and immunogenicity data from a phase 1 trial with the simian adenovirus vectored vaccine ChAdOx1 Chik, showing induction of neutralizing antibodies to four CHIKV lineages.
Effects of potent neutralizing antibodies from convalescent plasma in patients hospitalized for severe SARS-CoV-2 infectionThere are currently no drugs available to treat SARS-CoV-2 infection. A promising alternative treatment for COVID-19 patients is convalescent plasma. Here, Gharbharan et al. collect covalescent plasma and report no overall clinical benefit for 86 patients hospitalized for COVID-19 and treated with 300 mL convalescent plasma.
Peginterferon Lambda-1a for treatment of outpatients with uncomplicated COVID-19: a randomized placebo-controlled trialHere the authors report the results of randomized, single-blind, placebocontrolled trial on the effects of a asingle subcutaneous dose of Peginterferon Lambda-1a (Lambda) in 120 outpatients with mild to moderate COVID-19, showing that while treatment is well tolerated it does not shorten the duration of SARS-CoV-2 viral shedding nor improves symptoms.
A pragmatic randomized controlled trial reports lack of efficacy of hydroxychloroquine on coronavirus disease 2019 viral kineticsThe use of hydroxychloroquine therapy for the treatment of Covid-19 is controversial. In this study, Lyngbakken and colleagues present a randomized controlled trial and show that the drug has no antiviral effects in humans infected with SARS-CoV-2.
Efficacy of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 (AZD1222) vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 lineages circulating in BrazilEmerging variants of SARS-CoV-2 raise concerns about vaccine efficiency. Here, the authors present a post-hoc analysis for the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 (AZD1222) vaccine trial in Brazil and provide efficacy against symptomatic COVID-19 caused by the Zeta (P.2) and other variants.
Efficacy and tolerability of bevacizumab in patients with severe Covid-19In this single-arm clinical trial, the authors show that treatment of COVID-19 patients with bevacizumab, an anti-vascular endothelial growth factor drug, can improve PaO2/FiO2ratios and oxygen-support status. Relative to an external control group, bevacizumab shows clinical efficacy by improving oxygenation.
Mortality in individuals treated with COVID-19 convalescent plasma varies with the geographic provenance of donorsRegional differences in SARS-CoV-2 variants may affect treatment outcome. Here, the authors show that near-sourced convalescent plasma has higher efficacy, as defined by death within 30 days of transfusion, than plasma sourced more than 150 miles away.
Treatment of COVID-19 with remdesivir in the absence of humoral immunity: a case reportRemdesivir is under evaluation for treatment of COVID-19 in clinical trials. Here, the authors report results of remdesivir treatment in a patient with COVID-19 and the genetic antibody deficiency XLA. They show a temporally correlated clinical and virological response, suggesting that remdesivir can reduce SARS-CoV-2 replication in patients.
Within-host evolution of SARS-CoV-2 in an immunosuppressed COVID-19 patient as a source of immune escape variantsHere, in a longitudinal case study, Weigang et al. demonstrate that evolution of SARS-CoV-2 within a persistently infected immunosuppressed patient can result in the emergence of novel variants with reduced sensitivity to antibody neutralization.
Transplacental transmission of SARS-CoV-2 infectionCongenital infection of SARS-CoV-2 has been described, but the transmission routes remain unclear. Here, the authors report evidence of transplacental transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in a neonate born to a mother infected in the last trimester and presenting with neurological compromise.
Clinical practices underlie COVID-19 patient respiratory microbiome composition and its interactions with the hostHere, the authors profile the respiratory microbiome of COVID-19 patients and link clinical practices, such as mechanical ventilation, with vast changes in the microbiota. In the lungs, oral bacteria are found physically associated with proinflammatory immune cells, thus possibly contributing to exacerbated immune responses in severe diseaseCancerPhase II trial of cytarabine and mitoxantrone with devimistat in acute myeloid leukemiaCombining cytarabine and mitoxantrone with the tricarboxylic acid cycle inhibitor devimistat has been reported in a phase I clinical trial with relapsed or refractory acute myeloid leukaemia (AML). Here, the authors report the outcomes of a phase II study, analyse samples from both phases and perform preclinical analyses that show mitochondrial fission or autophagy inhibition sensitizes AML cells to devimistat.
Predictive biomarkers for survival benefit with ramucirumab in urothelial cancer in the RANGE trialIdentification of biomarkers to stratify patients who might benefit from treatment is needed to optimize targeted therapies. Here, based on an analysis of the RANGE trial (NCT02426125), the authors report potentially predictive biomarkers for survival benefit in patients with platinum-refractory advanced urothelial carcinoma treated with the anti-VEGFR2 monoclonal antibody ramucirumab.
Phase 2 study of pembrolizumab in patients with recurrent and residual high-grade meningiomasHigh-grade meningiomas have a poor prognosis with virtually no effective systemic therapies. Here, the authors report results of a phase 2 clinical trial demonstrating safety and activity of pembrolizumab, a PD-1 inhibitor, in patients with recurrent and residual high-grade meningiomas.
Clinical and biomarker analyses of sintilimab versus chemotherapy as second-line therapy for advanced or metastatic esophageal squamous cell carcinoma: a randomized, open-label phase 2 study (ORIENT-2)Patients with advanced esophageal cancer have poor prognosis and limited treatment options. This randomized, phase II trial compares the efficacy and safety of the anti-PD-1 antibody sintilimab versus chemotherapy in Chinese patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma after first-line therapyNeoadjuvant immunotherapy with nivolumab and ipilimumab induces major pathological responses in patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinomaImmune checkpoint blockade has become standard care for patients with recurrent metastatic head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Here the authors present the results of a non-randomized phase Ib/IIa trial, reporting safety and efficacy of neoadjuvant nivolumab monotherapy and nivolumab plus ipilimumab prior to standard-of-care surgery in patients with HNSCC. .
Depletion of central memory CD8+T cells might impede the antitumor therapeutic effect of MogamulizumabElimination of regulatory T cells via the anti-CCR4 monoclonal antibody, mogamulizumab, is expected to augment anti-tumour immune response. Authors show here that although regulatory T cell targeting is successful, clinical improvement remains minimal in patients with solid tumours due to concomitant and unintended depletion of central memory CD8+T cells.
Multiple site place-of-care manufactured anti-CD19 CAR-T cells induce high remission rates in B-cell malignancy patientsStrategies to address the challenges associated with product manufacturing can improve chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) cell–based therapeutics. Here the authors report the results of two clinical trials in patients with B-cell malignancies, showing that place-of-care manufacturing has a low production failure rate with CD19-directed CAR-T cell products inducing high remission rates.
Intermittent BRAF inhibition in advanced BRAF mutated melanoma results of a phase II randomized trialWhether intermittent strategies of delivering drugs can improve cancer patients survival is still unclear. Here, the authors reports the results of a randomized phase II clinical trial aimed to compare the efficacy and safety of two dosing regimens (continuous and intermittent) of vemurafenib and cobimetinib combination as first-line treatment of patients with unresectable or metastatic advanced melanoma with BRAFV600 mutationThree-year outcomes of the randomized phase III SEIPLUS trial of extensive intraoperative peritoneal lavage for locally advanced gastric cancerExtensive intraoperative peritoneal lavage (EIPL) has been proposed as an approach to reduce peritoneal metastasis in patients with locally advanced gastric cancer undergoing gastrectomy. Here the authors report the results of the multicentric phase III SEIPLUS trial, showing that EIPL does not improve 3-year survival rate in patients with advanced gastric cancer.
Pilot study of Tremelimumab with and without cryoablation in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinomaAnti-CTLA4 therapy has not been comprehensively explored for the treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC). Here, in a pilot study of anti-CTLA4 therapy with or without cryoablation in mRCC, the authors report that the combination is feasible and enhances immune infiltration in patients with metastatic clear cell histology.
Neoadjuvant T-DM1/pertuzumab and paclitaxel/trastuzumab/pertuzumab for HER2+breast cancer in the adaptively randomized I-SPY2 trialHER2-targeted therapy improves patient’s outcome in early breast cancer. Here, the authors present the efficacy and biomarker analysis of two HER2-targeted combinations (ado-trastuzumab emtansine plus pertuzumab and paclitaxel, trastuzumab and pertuzumab) in the context of the neoadjuvant I-SPY2 phase 2 adaptive platform trial for early breast cancer at high risk of recurrence.
Phase II study of ipilimumab and nivolumab in leptomeningeal carcinomatosisLeptomeningeal metastases from solid tumors are a rare complication with a very poor prognosis. Here the authors report the efficacy and safety of combined ipilimumab and nivolumab in patients with leptomeningeal carcinomatosis.
Molecular correlates of response to eribulin and pembrolizumab in hormone receptor-positive metastatic breast cancerA randomized phase 2 clinical trial has recently shown no benefit of the combination eribulin and pembrolizumab over pembrolizumab alone in HR + metastatic breast cancer patients (NCT03051659). Here, the authors are reporting the final OS data and biomarker analyses on a subset of samples to analyze molecular correlatesThe PEMDAC phase 2 study of pembrolizumab and entinostat in patients with metastatic uveal melanomaThe authors report the results of the phase II PEMDAC clinical study testing the combination of the HDAC inhibitor entinostat with the anti- PD-1 antibody pembrolizumab in uveal melanoma. Low tumor burden, a wildtype BAP1 gene in the tumor or iris melanoma correlates with response and longer survival.
Induction chemotherapy followed by definitive chemoradiotherapy versus chemoradiotherapy alone in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma: a randomized phase II trialThe benefit of induction chemotherapy before definitive chemoradiotherapy (CRT) for patients with esophageal cancer is still uncertain. The results of this phase II randomized trial show that the addition of induction chemotherapy to CRT does not improve the response rate or survival of patients with unresectable esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.
Phase Ib dose-escalation study of the hypoxia-modifier Myo-inositol trispyrophosphate in patients with hepatopancreatobiliary tumorsRestoring oxygenation in hypoxic tumors might lead to favorable oncological outcome of patients if combined with standard multimodal therapy regimens. Here the authors report a phase Ib clinical trial of anti-hypoxic myo-inositol trispyrophosphate (ITPP) in hepato-pancreato-biliary neoplasms.
Identification of optimal dosing schedules of dacomitinib and osimertinib for a phase I/II trial in advancedEGFR-mutant non-small cell lung cancerOsimertinib and dacomitinib are approved as first-line treatment ofEGFR-mutant NSCLC but resistance can arise. Here, the authors use a computational model to identify an optimal dosing schedule for osimertinib and dacomitinib combination therapy that was confirmed tolerable and effective in an ongoing phase I clinical trial.
Gut microbiota diversity after autologous fecal microbiota transfer in acute myeloid leukemia patientsThe combination of chemotherapy and broad-spectrum antibiotics induces gut microbiota (GM) dysbiosis in acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) leading to additional complications. Here, the authors report the efficacy in GM restoration and safety of autologous faecal microbiota transfer in treated AML patients in a phase II clinical trial.
Neoadjuvant anti-OX40 (MEDI6469) therapy in patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma activates and expands antigen-specific tumor-infiltrating T cellsDifferent neoadjuvant therapies have been proposed to improve immunotherapy for cancer treatment. Here, the authors perform a phase Ib clinical trial where an agonist OX40 antibody provided prior to surgery is well tolerated and increases proliferation and activation of tumor antigen-specific T cells in head and neck cancer patients.
Inhibition of RANK signaling in breast cancer induces an anti-tumor immune response orchestrated by CD8+ T cellsReceptor activator of nuclear factor-κB (RANK)/RANK-ligand (RANKL) signaling regulates the tumor-immune crosstalk. Here the authors show that systemic RANKL inhibition promotes CD8 + T cell infiltration in patients with early breast cancer and that loss of RANK signaling in tumor cells drives a T cell-dependent anti-tumor response in preclinical models.
Pathologic and molecular responses to neoadjuvant trastuzumab and/or lapatinib from a phase II randomized trial in HER2-positive breast cancer (TRIO-US B07)HER2+ breast cancer patients can often develop resistance to trastuzumab and therefore potential combination therapies need to be explored. Here, the authors report the results of a multi-center randomized phase II clinical trial evaluating the pathological and molecular responses associated with trastuzumab and/or lapatinib in combination with chemotherapy in HER2+ breast cancer patients.
Th17-inducing autologous dendritic cell vaccination promotes antigen-specific cellular and humoral immunity in ovarian cancer patientsThe folate receptor alpha (FRα) is overexpressed in the majority of high-grade serous ovarian cancers and has been proposed as a candidate vaccine antigen. Here the authors report the safety and immunogenicity of Th17-inducing dendritic cells pulsed with FRα-derived epitopes in an early phase I clinical trial with ovarian cancer patients.
Faecal microbiota transplantation for the treatment of diarrhoea induced by tyrosine-kinase inhibitors in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinomaTyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have improved the clinical outcomes of patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC), however TKI-related diarrhoea is a common and serious adverse effect. Here the authors show in a randomized clinical trial that faecal microbiota transplantation from healthy donors can improve TKI-induced diarrhoea in patients with mRCC.
Fasting mimicking diet as an adjunct to neoadjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer in the multicentre randomized phase 2 DIRECT trialPreclinical evidence suggests that a fasting mimicking diet (FMD) can make cancer cells more vulnerable to chemotherapy, while protecting normal cells. In this randomized phase II clinical trial of 131 patients with HER2 negative early stage breast cancer, the authors demonstrate that FMD is safe and enhances the effects of neoadjuvant chemotherapy on radiological and pathological tumor response.
Physiology and diseaseA parallel randomised controlled trial of the Hypoglycaemia Awareness Restoration Programme for adults with type 1 diabetes and problematic hypoglycaemia despite optimised self-care (HARPdoc)Impaired awareness of hypoglycaemia (IAH) is a risk for severe hypoglycaemia in insulin treatment of type 1 diabetes (T1D). Here the authors report that a group programme focussing on changing cognitive barriers to avoiding hypoglycaemia (HARPdoc) does not reduce severe hypoglycaemia more than a programme focussing on behaviours (BGAT) in a randomized control trial in adults with T1D and treatment-resistant IAH and severe hypoglycaemia.
Lower novelty-related locus coeruleus function is associated with Aβ-related cognitive decline in clinically healthy individualsOlder individuals exhibiting diminished function of the locus coeruleus while learning new information show faster cognitive decline that is typical for Alzheimer’s disease.
Spelling interface using intracortical signals in a completely locked-in patient enabled via auditory neurofeedback trainingThe authors record neural firing rates in a patient with ALS in completely locked-in state and show that the patient can modulate neural firing rates based on auditory feedback to select letters to form words and phrases to communicate his needs and experiences.
A systematic review and meta-analysis of gene therapy with hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells for monogenic disordersEx-vivo gene therapy with hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) is a promising treatment for monogenic diseases. Here the authors report a systematic review and meta-analysis of available evidence assessing clinical outcomes of HSPC gene therapy from clinical trials.
Randomized controlled trial for time-restricted eating in healthy volunteers without obesityTime-restricted eating, both early (eTRF) and mid-day (mTRF), have been shown to have metabolic benefits. Here the authors report a randomized controlled trial to compare the effects of eTRF and mTRF in healthy volunteers without obesity, and find that eTRF is more effective in improving the primary outcome insulin sensitivity.
Simultaneous perception of prosthetic and natural vision in AMD patientsAtrophic age-related macular degeneration (AMD) results in visual impairment. Here the authors report interim analysis of open-label single group feasibility trial using a wireless photovoltaic subretinal implant in patients with atrophic AMD, and report that the patients exhibited prosthetic visual perception with acuity closely matching the pixel size during the 18-24 month follow-up period.
Tolerogenic nanoparticles mitigate the formation of anti-drug antibodies against pegylated uricase in patients with hyperuricemiaAnti-drug antibodies (ADA) induced by biologic drugs may hamper the efficacy of treatment, so inhibiting ADA induction is desirable. Here, in two clinical trials, the authors show that ImmTOR, previously reported to reduce drug immunogenicity in animal studies, helps mitigate ADA induced by pegylated uricase for treating patients with hyperuricemia.
Premature commitment to uncertain decisions during human NMDA receptor hypofunctionIn uncertain conditions, people make accurate decisions by considering multiple pieces of information. Here, the authors show that pharmacological n-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor hypofunction is associated with elevated uncertainty and premature decisions based on unreliable evidence.
A phase 2, proof of concept, randomised controlled trial of berberine ursodeoxycholate in patients with presumed non-alcoholic steatohepatitis and type 2 diabetesBerberine ursodeoxycholate has been studied for its serum lipid and lipoprotein lowering effects. Here the authors report an 18-week phase 2, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial that tested the effect of berberine ursodeoxycholate in patients with fatty liver disease and diabetes, and showed that the group taking the higher dose of the drug had reduced liver fat content.
A randomized controlled trial of pharmacist-led therapeutic carbohydrate and energy restriction in type 2 diabetesCommunity pharmacists are accessible healthcare providers with expertise in medication management. Here the authors show that a low-carbohydrate, low-energy diet implemented by community pharmacists reduced diabetes medication use and improved glucose control in people with type 2 diabetes.
Metabolic responses to mild cold acclimation in type 2 diabetes patientsCold acclimation has been shown to have beneficial metabolic effects, including improved insulin sensitivity in patients with type 2 diabetes. Here the authors show that a mild cold acclimation regiment during which overt shivering was prevented did not result in improved insulin sensitivity in a small group of patients with type 2 diabetes.
Lentivirus-mediated gene therapy for Fabry diseaseTreatments for Fabry disease, an inherited lysosomal disorder caused by the deficiency of the enzyme alpha-galactosidase A, are not fully efficacious. Here the authors report a single-arm phase I trial of gene therapy with autologous, lentivirus-transduced, hematopoietic cells that express alpha-galactosidase A to demonstrate that this approach is safe in five patients with Fabry disease.
Blood-brain barrier opening with focused ultrasound in Parkinson’s disease dementiaBlood brain barrier (BBB) opening is being investigated as a therapeutic approach for neurodegenerative diseases. Here, the authors report the results of a phase I trial to evaluate the feasibility and safety of BBB opening of the right parieto-occipito-temporal cortex in Parkinson´s disease with dementia.
Clinical transplantation using negative pressure ventilation ex situ lung perfusion with extended criteria donor lungsPreclinical studies have shown that negative pressure ventilation ex situ lung perfusion results in less ventilator-induced lung injury compared to positive pressure ventilation of donor lungs during transplantation procedures. Here the authors perform a single-arm clinical trial with 12 participants to study patient survival and primary graft dysfunction with ex situ lung perfusion.
Gut microbiome-related effects of berberine and probiotics on type 2 diabetes (the PREMOTE study)The gut microbiome affects systemic metabolism and is a therapeutic target for type 2 diabetes. Here the authors demonstrate in a randomized controlled trial that effects of berberine, a plant alkaloid known to lower blood glucose, may be explained by the inhibition ofRuminococcus bromiimediated biotransformation of the bile acid deoxycholic acid.
A nonrandomized open-label phase 2 trial of nonischemic heart preservation for human heart transplantationIschemia and reperfusion damage contribute to early graft dysfunction and recipient’s death. Here the authors show the feasibility and safety of a non-ischemic heart preservation method for heart transplantation in a non-randomized trial.
Transplantation of discarded livers following viability testing with normothermic machine perfusionThe shortage of viable donated livers limits patient access to liver transplantation. Here the authors report the use of normothermic machine perfusion to help identify viable organs from livers discarded based on current clinical criteria, which are then transplanted to recipients in a single-arm clinical trial.
SGLT2 inhibition modulates NLRP3 inflammasome activity via ketones and insulin in diabetes with cardiovascular diseaseSGLT2 inhibitors, a class of type 2 diabetes medication, reduce cardiovascular events in patients beyond expectation from blood sugar control. Here the authors report a randomized controlled trial showing that SGLT2 inhibitors reduce inflammasome activation in peripheral macrophages, which may contribute to the cardiovascular protection.
First-in-human trial of blood–brain barrier opening in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis using MR-guided focused ultrasoundMR-focused ultrasound can be used to transiently open the blood-brain barrier (BBB). Here, the authors report the results of a first-in-human trial on four patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), showing that the procedure reversibly permeabilised the BBB in the motor cortex without complications, and suggest that the procedure could in the future be used to increase drug delivery in ALS patients.
Blood–brain barrier opening in Alzheimer’s disease using MR-guided focused ultrasoundMagnetic resonance-guided focused ultrasound with injected microbubbles has been used to temporarily open the blood–brain barrier (BBB) in animal models of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Here, the authors use this technology to non-invasively open the BBB in 5 patients with mild-to-moderate AD in a phase I trial, and show that the procedure is safe.
Noninvasive spinal stimulation safely enables upright posture in children with spinal cord injuryScoliosis due to trunk muscle paralysis frequently requires surgical treatment in children with spinal cord injury. The authors demonstrate the safety and efficacy of transcutaneous spinal stimulation to enable upright sitting posture in 7/8 children with trunk control impairment in a within-subjects, repeated measures pilot clinical trial.
Shifting parental beliefs about child development to foster parental investments and improve school readiness outcomesParents’ investments in their children are a critical input in the production of early skills, yet those investments differ across socioeconomic backgrounds. Here the authors show that variations in parental beliefs about the impact of such investments can be one of the sources of investment disparities, and report interventions that can potentially shift those beliefs.
Gene therapy for aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency by MR-guided direct delivery of AAV2-AADC to midbrain dopaminergic neuronsAromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency (AADC) is a rare neurodevelopmental disorder. Here the authors describe a clinical trial of MR-guided delivery of AAV2-AADC for the treatment of AADC.
Exposure to 16 h of normobaric hypoxia induces ionic edema in the healthy brainProlonged hypoxia, which can be due to stroke or ascent to high altitude, can lead to cerebral edema. Here, the authors used a combination of sodium and proton MRI and experimentally induced hypoxic conditions to identify the cause for brain swelling: Ionic edema, an intermediate between cytotoxic and vasogenic edema defined by sodium ion accumulation in extracellular space and an intact endothelium.
The role of maternal preconception vitamin D status in human offspring sex ratioHigher vitamin D is associated with improved pregnancy and live birth rates, but its potential role in the human offspring sex ratio in unknown. Here, the authors show that the levels of vitamin D at preconception are positively associated with male live birth, particularly among women presenting inflammatory markers.
Brain insulin sensitivity is linked to adiposity and body fat distributionBrain insulin action regulates eating behavior and whole-body energy fluxes, however the impact of brain insulin resistance on long-term weight and body fat composition is unknown. Here, the authors show that high brain insulin sensitivity is linked to weight loss during lifestyle intervention and associates with a favorable body fat distribution.
Microbiology and infectious diseasesBacteriophage treatment of disseminated cutaneousMycobacterium chelonaeinfectionIncreasing rates of multidrug-resistant bacterial infections has renewed interest in the therapeutic use of phages. Here the authors report an individual with cutaneous M. chelonae infection, and the improvement of disease upon treatment with a bacteriophage in combination with antimicrobial therapy.
Randomized clinical trial to assess the protective efficacy of aPlasmodium vivaxCS synthetic vaccineIn this phase 2 clinical trial, the authors assess protective efficacy of aPlasmodium vivaxcircumsporozoite vaccine in naïve and semi-immune individuals from controlled human malaria infection as well as antibody and IFN-γ response to vaccination.
First-in-human immunoPET imaging of HIV-1 infection using89Zr-labeled VRC01 broadly neutralizing antibodyHere, the authors apply positron emission tomography (PET) imaging to visualize HIV tissue-wide burden in infected individuals using a radiolabeled broadly neutralizing antibody,89Zr-VRC01, and show that PET tracer lymph node uptake positively correlates with HIV protein levels measured directly from cells obtained from these tissues. This strategy may allow non-invasive characterization of residual HIV infection in the setting of therapeutic interventions.
Effect of biannual azithromycin distribution on antibody responses to malaria, bacterial, and protozoan pathogens in NigerIn a randomized placebo-controlled trial in rural Niger, biannual azithromycin distribution to children 1-59 months reduced all-cause mortality. Based on serology, Arzikaet al. here report a reduction ofCampylobacterinfection, supporting one mechanism for the intervention’s impact on mortality.
Effects of early-life antibiotics on the developing infant gut microbiome and resistome: a randomized trialHere, in a randomized trial of 147 infants receiving distinct antibiotic regimens for early-onset neonatal sepsis, Reyman et al. characterize the gut microbiome and resistance profiles, finding differential effects of antibiotic combinations on microbial community composition and antimicrobial resistance genes.
Impact of maternal antibodies and microbiota development on the immunogenicity of oral rotavirus vaccine in African, Indian, and European infantsOral rotavirus vaccine (ORV) efficacy varies between countries, but underlying reasons aren’t fully understood. In this prospective cohort study, authors show that maternal rotavirus-specific antibodies in serum and breastmilk and pre-vaccination microbiota diversity are negatively correlated with ORV response in India and Malawi but not in the UK.
A single dose of ChAdOx1 Chik vaccine induces neutralizing antibodies against four chikungunya virus lineages in a phase 1 clinical trialChikungunya virus (CHIKV) is a reemerging mosquito-borne virus that has caused outbreaks in various regions of the world. Here the authors present safety and immunogenicity data from a phase 1 trial with the simian adenovirus vectored vaccine ChAdOx1 Chik, showing induction of neutralizing antibodies to four CHIKV lineages.
Heterologous protection against malaria by a simple chemoattenuated PfSPZ vaccine regimen in a randomized trialIn this placebo-controlled trial, 10/13 malaria naïve subjects immunized with a simplified regimen of chemoattenuatedP. falciparumsporozoites, PfSPZ-CVac, show sterile protection from heterologous malaria challenge. Immunization was well tolerated and induced high levels of anti-PfCSP antibodies.
Fecal microbiota transplantation in HIV: A pilot placebo-controlled studyIt is unknown whether capsulized fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) can modify the microbiota of people with HIV. Here, the authors report the results of a pilot double-blind study, where 30 HIV-infected subjects on ART were randomized to either weekly oral FMT capsules or placebo for 8 weeks, and show that transplanted microbiota successfully engrafts and is able to attenuate HIV-associated dysbiosis.
Exposure to pesticides in utero impacts the fetal immune system and response to vaccination in infancyControl of mosquito populations using pesticides is important for malaria elimination, but effects of pesticides on humans aren’t well understood. Here, Prahl et al. show in a cohort of pregnant Ugandan women and their infants that household spraying with bendiocarb affects the fetal immune system and response to vaccination in infancy.
A Phase I/II randomized trial of H56:IC31 vaccination and adjunctive cyclooxygenase-2-inhibitor treatment in tuberculosis patientsModulating the host immune response during tuberculosis is an emerging and critical advance in the therapeutic approach. Here the authors present data from a first-in-human phase I/II randomised trial on the safety and immunogenicity of adjuvant therapy of the H56:IC31 vaccine and cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors in patients with tuberculosis.
Hormonal contraception alters vaginal microbiota and cytokines in South African adolescents in a randomized trialHormonal contraception may alter women’s susceptibility to HIV. Here, the authors report the results of a randomized clinical trial substudy assessing the effects of injectable Net-En, oral contraceptives (COC) and Nuvaring on vaginal microbiota and cytokines, associating COC with lower microbial diversity and Nuvaring with increased inflammation.
Quantitative evaluation of protective antibody response induced by hepatitis E vaccine in humansThe authors provide a comprehensive characterization of the human antibody response to a licensed hepatitis E virus (HEV) vaccine, Hecolin, in four individuals over the course of six months post vaccination. They demonstrate diverse patterns of antibody response underlying the vaccine protection.
Analysis of immune, microbiota and metabolome maturation in infants in a clinical trial ofLactobacillus paracaseiCBA L74-fermented formulaMilk breastfeeding and prebiotic-supplemented formulas have varying effects on the infant gut microbiome. Here, in a randomized controlled clinical trial, the authors investigate the effects of aLactobacillus paracasei-fermented formula on the immune defense mechanisms, microbiota and its metabolome in full term infants.
A randomized trial evaluating virus-specific effects of a combination probiotic in children with acute gastroenteritisHere, the authors report the results of a randomized, placebo controlled trial of children with acute gastroenteritis who were treated with a probiotic and find no virus-specific beneficial effects attributable to the probiotic, either in reducing clinical symptoms or clearance of viral nucleic acid from stool specimens.
Prenatal dietary supplements influence the infant airway microbiota in a randomized factorial clinical trialHere, the authors present the results of a mother–child cohort randomized clinical trial of n-3 LCPUFA and vitamin D maternal supplementation, finding an association between supplement-induced microbiota changes in infant airways at age 1-month but not the infant fecal or maternal vaginal microbiome.
In vivo evolution of an emerging zoonotic bacterial pathogen in an immunocompromised human hostBordetella hinziiis an emerging pathogen with zoonotic risk to humans, known to be able to cause respiratory tract infection, bacteremia and endocarditis. Here, applying whole genome sequencing to bacterial isolates, the authors characterize the mechanisms driving adaptive evolution inB. hinziiin a patient with interleukin-12 receptor β1 deficiency, suggesting a role for host immune phenotype in shaping within-host pathogen evolution following zoonotic infection.
Rapid evolution and host immunity drive the rise and fall of carbapenem resistance during an acutePseudomonas aeruginosainfectionHere, following a patient with severe acutePseudomonas aeruginosainfection, the authors combine comprehensive isolate characterization from lung and gut samples (>100 isolates) and patient clinical data to provide insights into bacterial responses to antibiotic therapy.
A novel nairovirus associated with acute febrile illness in Hokkaido, JapanHere, Kodama et al. describe the discovery, isolation and characterization of a novel tick-borne orthonairovirus, designated Yezo virus (YEZV), from patients with an acute febrile illness in Japan. Serological testing of wildlife and molecular screening of ticks suggest an endemic circulation of YEZV in Japan.
Characterization of a newLeishmania majorstrain for use in a controlled human infection modelControlled human infection models (CHIMs) provide a pathway for accelerating vaccine development. Here, the authors describe the isolation, characterization, and GMP manufacture of a clinicalLeishmania majorstrain to be used as a resource for CHIM studies of sand fly transmitted cutaneous leishmaniasis.
Human norovirus targets enteroendocrine epithelial cells in the small intestineHuman norovirus pathogenesis is incompletely understood due to a lack of appropriate animal disease models. Here, Green et al. show norovirus replication in chromogranin A-positive enteroendocrine cells and other epithelial cells in tissue from a pediatric intestinal transplant recipient with severe gastroenteritis.
Microbiota-based markers predictive of development ofClostridioides difficileinfectionClostridioides difficileinfection (CDI) is the most common cause of antibiotic-associated diarrhoea (AAD); however, markers predictive of CDI or AAD development are as yet lacking. Here, to identify markers predictive of CDI, the authors profile the intestinal microbiota of 945 hospitalised patients from 34 hospitals in 6 different European countries and show distinct microbiota enriched inEnterococcusand depleted ofRuminococcus, Blautia, PrevotellaandBifidobacteriumcompared to non-CDI patients.
Incidence and predictive biomarkers ofClostridioides difficileinfection in hospitalized patients receiving broad-spectrum antibioticsHere, the authors report the incidence ofClostridioides difficileinfection (CDI) and assess potential clinical characteristics and biomarkers to predict CDI in 1,007 patients of 50 years and above receiving newly initiated antibiotic treatment.
Whole-genome sequencing ofSchistosoma mansonireveals extensive diversity with limited selection despite mass drug administrationSchistosomiasis control strategies rely on mass drug administration (MDA) using praziquantel. Here, Berger et al. perform whole-genome sequencing of larvae from infected children across Ugandan regions with differing MDA histories. They find extensive gene flow with limited positive selection suggesting minimal change post MDA.
Integrated omics endotyping of infants with respiratory syncytial virus bronchiolitis and risk of childhood asthmaRespiratory syncytial virus (RSV) bronchiolitis during infancy is a major risk factor for asthma development. Here, Raita et al. integrate clinical data with airway microbiome, transcriptome, and metabolome data and identity four endotypes with differential risks for developing asthma.
Explore contentAbout the journalPublish with usSearchAdvanced searchQuick linksImage credit: LumiNola / GettyNature Communications (Nat Commun)ISSN2041-1723(online)nature.com sitemapDiscover contentPublishing policiesAuthor & Researcher servicesLibraries & institutionsAdvertising & partnershipsCareer developmentRegional websitesLegal & Privacy© 2022 Springer Nature LimitedAccess provided by ' + names[0] + 'Access provided by ' + names[0] + '
