old id = 630
AI researchers need to stop hiding the climate toll of their work | MIT Technology Review
2022
https://www.technologyreview.com/f/614056/ai-research-has-an-environment-climate-toll

AI researchers need to stop hiding the climate toll of their workThe Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence (AI2) is proposing a new way to incentivize energy-efficient machine learning.
Exploding footprint:More researchers are sounding the alarm about the growing costs of deep learning. In 2018, OpenAIpublished a studyshowing that the computational resources required to train large models was doubling every three to four months. In June,another studyfound that developing large-scale natural-language processing models, in particular, could produce a shocking carbon footprint.
The trend is driven by the research community’s emphasis on advancing the state of the art—with little regard to costs. While there are leaderboards that celebrate performance breakthroughs, for example, they rarely mention what those incremental improvements cost. Often, linear increases in performance are unlocked through exponential increases in resources. At this rate, one expert predicts, AI could account for as much asone-tenth of the world’s electricity useby 2025.
Rich get richer:These statistics aren’t just concerning from an environmental perspective. They also have implications on the field’s diversity and advancement. The sheer amount of resources needed to produce notable results privileges private over academic AI labs. This could restrict the field’s development to shorter-term projects that are more aligned with corporate incentives rather than longer-term advances that would benefit the public, for example.
Show your work:Ina new paper, researchers at the Seattle-based AI2 have proposed a new way to mitigate this trend. They recommend that AI researchers always publish the financial and computational costs of training their models along with their performance results. The authors hope that increasing transparency into what it takes to achieve performance gains will motivate more investment in the development of efficient machine-learning algorithms.
Oren Etzioni, the CEO of AI2 and an author on the paper, also thinks that paper reviewers for publications and conferences should reward those that improve efficiency as much as accuracy. Until people standardize efficiency metrics, it will be difficult to evaluate the importance of such a contribution. “I view reporting these numbers as necessary but not sufficient,” he says.
Why now?Recent years have seen a dramatic escalation in the amount of computing power that corporate research labs are throwing at deep learning.
But Etzioni hopes the community can be more aware of the trade-offs. Plus, investing in more efficient algorithms could wring more mileage out of available resources and produce other gains. It’s not an either-or thing, he says: “We just want to have a better balance in the field.”byKaren HaoSharePopularDeep DiveArtificial intelligenceArtificial intelligence is creating a new colonial world orderAn MIT Technology Review series investigates how AI is enriching a powerful few by dispossessing communities that have been dispossessed before.
Meta has built a massive new language AI—and it’s giving it away for freeFacebook’s parent company is inviting researchers to pore over and pick apart the flaws in its version of GPT-3This horse-riding astronaut is a milestone in AI’s journey to make sense of the worldOpenAI’s latest picture-making AI is amazing—but raises questions about what we mean by intelligence.
How the AI industry profits from catastropheAs the demand for data labeling exploded, an economic catastrophe turned Venezuela into ground zero for a new model of labor exploitation.
Stay connectedGet the latest updates fromMIT Technology ReviewDiscover special offers, top stories, upcoming events, and more.
Thank you for submitting your email!It looks like something went wrong.
We’re having trouble saving your preferences. Try refreshing this page and updating them one more time. If you continue to get this message, reach out to us atcustomer-service@technologyreview.comwith a list of newsletters you’d like to receive.
MIT Technology ReviewOur in-depth reporting reveals what’s going on now to prepare you for what’s coming next.
Subscribeto support our journalism.
AboutHelp© 2022 MIT Technology Review
