old id = 4900
Knowable Magazine
2022
https://www.knowablemagazine.org

Make electric vehicles affordable for the rest of usEV subsidies are poorly designed and mostly benefit the rich. Some simple changes could make them more effective and equitable.
By Tamara SheldonMake electric vehicles affordable for the rest of usEV subsidies are poorly designed and mostly benefit the rich. Some simple changes could make them more effective and equitable.
By Tamara SheldonSupport Knowable MagazineHelp us make scientific knowledge accessible to allThe creative way to pay for wildlife recovery‘Pragmatic rewilding’ restores damaged ecosystems and harnesses private money, with benefits for allA lifetime of climate changeResearcher Arun Agrawal has lived three decades on either side of a watershed: the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, signed 30 years ago this June. His 60 years are a window into how far we have come, and how far there is to go.
The race against radonScientists are working to map out the risks of the permafrost thaw, which could expose millions of people to the invisible cancer-causing gasThe tale of the domesticated horseThe beloved animal has shaped human history over millennia, just as people have influenced its evolution — but only recently have scientists discovered exactly when and where it went from wild to tameGallium: The liquid metal that could transform soft electronicsBend it. Stretch it. Use it to conduct electricity. Researchers are exploring a range of applications that harness the element’s unusual properties.
Knowable Magazineis a nonprofit, mission-driven publication that seeks to make scientific knowledge accessible to all. Free to read, republish and share. An editorially independent journalistic endeavor published byAnnual Reviews.
Stay in the KnowSubscribe to theKnowable Magazinenewsletter.
Does online opioid treatment work?The Covid-19 pandemic brought a sudden shift to virtual health care. That has increased access — and possibly outcomes, too — for patients with opioid use disorder.
The awake ape: Why people sleep less than their primate relativesAncient humans may have evolved to slumber efficiently — and in a crowdMining museums’ genomic treasuresThe world’s natural history collections hold billions of biological specimens, many of which still contain DNA. Scientists exploring these genetic repositories are gaining new, historical perspectives on how animals evolve.
How antidepressants changed ideas about depressionPODCAST: Serendipitous discoveries led to drugs like Prozac and to new insights into the physical basis of this debilitating disorder. But scientists continue to search for deeper understandings and therapies that will bring relief to those who still struggle. (Season 2, Episode 6)Mapping the brain to understand the mindNew technology is enabling neuroscientists to make increasingly detailed wiring diagrams that could yield new insights into brain functionVaccinating the world against Covid-19Lower-income countries haven’t gotten an equal share of lifesaving coronavirus vaccines. Older, more familiar vaccine technologies may hold the key to more equitable use, says Maria Elena Bottazzi.
The first malaria vaccine is a leap forward, but we can’t stop nowOPINION: Next-generation vaccines, and a lot more money, are needed now to crack the stalemate in the fight against malariaRethinking air conditioning amid climate changeACs and refrigerators help keep people safe — but they also further warm the planet. Scientists are working on eco-friendlier solutions as global demand for cooling grows.
MultimediaCovid-19: Origins of an outbreakCan a fire-ravaged forest of Joshua trees be restored?Why Covid-19 testing went so wrong in the US, and what to do nowCovid’s main lesson? For this journalist, it’s unpredictabilityCovid-19: Why race matters for healthSARS-CoV-2: Evolution of a virusCovid-19: Origins of an outbreakVIDEO: Where do new diseases come from? As people increasingly push into remote areas, the risk of encountering new pathogens increases, says wildlife epidemiologist Jonna Mazet.
Can a fire-ravaged forest of Joshua trees be restored?VIDEO: In August 2020, the Dome Fire burned more than 40,000 acres of the iconic species’ range in the Mojave Desert, leaving a graveyard of blackened trees. A massive replanting effort now underway hopes to return life to the fragile ecosystem by boosting numbers of the climate-threatened plant.
Why Covid-19 testing went so wrong in the US, and what to do nowVIDEO: Delays, errors and a fragmented response initially kept public health officials in the dark about the spread of SARS-CoV-2. More tests and easy access could still play a critical role in slowing the virus.
Covid’s main lesson? For this journalist, it’s unpredictabilityVIDEO:New York Timesscience reporter Apoorva Mandavilli chronicles the rise of the delta variant, the latest of many twists in the pandemic that she’s covered since it began. Delta has left parents in an especially tough spot, with schools opening but young children still vulnerable.
Covid-19: Why race matters for healthVIDEO: The pandemic has highlighted the complex links between inequality, racism and disease risk in America. Harvard public health scholar David Williams explains.
SARS-CoV-2: Evolution of a virusVIDEO: Scientists expected the novel coronavirus would mutate and change. But its runaway spread means new, more dangerous variants are more likely to emerge. Harvard computational geneticist Pardis Sabeti explains.
Don’t let climate change take all the blameOPINION: The climate crisis is a massive problem, but when politicians fault it entirely for every disaster, attention is deflected from local measures that might build resiliency. That needs to change.
Could high-flying kites power your home?Nearly a dozen companies are betting on computer-controlled, airborne wind energy to electrify the futureCovid-19: Origins of an outbreakVIDEO: Where do new diseases come from? As people increasingly push into remote areas, the risk of encountering new pathogens increases, says wildlife epidemiologist Jonna Mazet.
Bear hibernation: More than a winter’s napThe creatures’ annual protracted snoozes have much to tell us about the biology of mammals, ourselves included. Now scientists are watching to see how bears will tweak their habits as the climate warms.
The next evolution of digital money? It’s happening nowOPINION: After cryptoassets, a wave of central bank digital currencies is set to revolutionize our ideas about what money is and how to manage itHow antidepressants changed ideas about depressionPODCAST: Serendipitous discoveries led to drugs like Prozac and to new insights into the physical basis of this debilitating disorder. But scientists continue to search for deeper understandings and therapies that will bring relief to those who still struggle. (Season 2, Episode 6)How particle accelerators came to bePODCAST: They started out so small, one could fit on the palm of your hand, but to make groundbreaking discoveries, physicists had to think really big — as in, vast machines with the power and capacity to reveal the tiniest building blocks of our universe (Season 2/Episode 5)The history of climate change offers clues to Earth’s futurePODCAST: Digging — quite literally — into our planet’s past to study its paleoclimate has shed light on bygone ice ages and hints at trouble ahead for our now-warming world (Season 2/Episode 4)How particle accelerators came to bePODCAST: They started out so small, one could fit on the palm of your hand, but to make groundbreaking discoveries, physicists had to think really big — as in, vast machines with the power and capacity to reveal the tiniest building blocks of our universe (Season 2/Episode 5)The pain of prolonged grief disorderPsychologists are beginning to understand that for some people, intense and sustained feelings of loss are symptoms of a serious condition — one that can last for years and erode wellbeingCochineal, a red dye from bugs, moves to the labCarminic acid is a bright, natural coloring used in some cosmetics and foods. It’s traditionally sourced from ‘farming’ an insect on acres of prickly pears. Today, scientists are moving to engineer it in microbes.
A path to Covid-19 vaccine equityVIDEO: When can the people who still need a Covid-19 vaccine expect to get one? Delve into the supply, distribution and political issues delaying global access to a lifesaving, economy-rescuing marvel.
Urban evolution: How species adapt to survive in citiesPlants and animals are evolving in cities around the world — offering ways to study longstanding scientific questions and clues to where climate change is taking usThe creative way to pay for wildlife recovery‘Pragmatic rewilding’ restores damaged ecosystems and harnesses private money, with benefits for allThe first malaria vaccine is a leap forward, but we can’t stop nowOPINION: Next-generation vaccines, and a lot more money, are needed now to crack the stalemate in the fight against malariaDon’t let climate change take all the blameOPINION: The climate crisis is a massive problem, but when politicians fault it entirely for every disaster, attention is deflected from local measures that might build resiliency. That needs to change.
The invention of incarcerationPrisons have been controversial since their beginnings in the late 1700s — why do they keep failing to live up to expectations?A rise in US flooding — and a rethink“Gray” infrastructure throws up walls against the coastal flooding affecting many cities. But salvation may lie in leaning in toward green controls like wetlands and mangroves — and heeding the experience of the Dutch.
The history of climate change offers clues to Earth’s futurePODCAST: Digging — quite literally — into our planet’s past to study its paleoclimate has shed light on bygone ice ages and hints at trouble ahead for our now-warming world (Season 2/Episode 4)Pandemic psychology: Nothing new under the SunOPINION: Our behavior during Covid-19 echoes that of individuals, societies and governments during past plagues. We can and should do better.
Support Knowable MagazineHelp us make scientific knowledge accessible to allKnowable Magazine is fromAnnual Reviews, a nonprofit publisher dedicated to synthesizing and integrating knowledge for the progress of science and the benefit of society.
© 2022 Annual ReviewsKnowable Magazine is available for free. But we need your support.
Help us make scientific knowledge accessible to allDONATE NOW
