old id = 674
The field of natural language processing is chasing the wrong goal | MIT Technology Review
2022
https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/07/31/1005876/natural-language-processing-evaluation-ai-opinion

The field of natural language processing is chasing the wrong goalAt a typical annual meeting of theAssociation for Computational Linguistics(ACL), the program is a parade of titles like“A Structured Variational Autoencoder for Contextual Morphological Inflection.”The same technical flavor permeates the papers, the research talks, and many hallway chats.
At this year’sconferencein July, though, something felt different—and it wasn’t just the virtual format. Attendees’ conversations were unusually introspective about the core methods and objectives of natural-language processing (NLP), the branch of AI focused on creating systems that analyze or generate human language. Papers in this year’s new“Theme” trackasked questions like: Are current methodsreallyenoughto achieve the field’s ultimate goals?Whateven are those goals?My colleagues and I atElemental Cognition, an AI research firm based in Connecticut and New York, see the angst as justified. In fact, we believe that the field needs a transformation, not just in system design, but in a less glamorous area: evaluation.
The current NLP zeitgeist arose from half a decade of steady improvements under the standard evaluation paradigm. Systems’ ability to comprehend has generally been measured onbenchmark data setsconsisting of thousands of questions, each accompanied by passages containing the answer. When deep neural networks swept the field in the mid-2010s, they brought a quantum leap in performance. Subsequent rounds of work kept inching scores ever closer to 100% (or at least to parity with humans).
So researchers would publish new data sets ofeventrickierquestions, only to see even bigger neural networks quickly post impressive scores. Much of today’s reading comprehension research entails carefully tweaking models to eke out a few more percentage points on the latest data sets. “State of the art” has practically become a proper noun: “We beat SOTA onSQuADby 2.4 points!”Butmanypeopleinthefieldare growing weary of such leaderboard-chasing. What has the world really gained if a massive neural network achieves SOTA on some benchmark by a point or two? It’s not as though anyone cares about answering these questions for their own sake; winning the leaderboard is an academic exercise that may not make real-world tools any better. Indeed, many apparent improvements emerge not from general comprehension abilities, but from models’ extraordinary skill atexploitingspuriouspatternsin the data. Do recent “advances” really translate into helping people solve problems?Such doubts are more than abstract fretting; whether systems are truly proficient at language comprehension has real stakes for society. Of course, “comprehension” entails a broad collection of skills. For simpler applications—such as retrieving Wikipedia factoids or assessing the sentiment in product reviews—modern methodsdo pretty well. But when people imagine computers that comprehend language, they envision far more sophisticated behaviors: legal tools that help people analyze their predicaments; research assistants that synthesize information from across the web; robots or game characters that carry out detailed instructions.
Today’s models are nowhere close to achieving that level of comprehension—and it’s not clear that yet another SOTA paper will bring the field any closer.
How did the NLP community end up with such a gap between on-paper evaluations and real-world ability? In an ACLposition paper, my colleagues and I argue that in the quest to reach difficult benchmarks, evaluations have lost sight of the real targets: those sophisticated downstream applications. To borrow a line from the paper, the NLP researchers have been training to become professional sprinters by “glancing around the gym and adopting any exercises that look hard.”To bring evaluations more in line with the targets, it helps to consider what holds today’s systems back.
A human reading a passage will build a detailed representation of entities, locations, events, and their relationships—a “mental model” of the world described in the text. The reader can then fill in missing details in the model, extrapolate a scene forward or backward, or even hypothesize about counterfactual alternatives.
This sort of modeling and reasoning is precisely what automated research assistants or game characters must do—and it’s conspicuously missing from today’s systems. An NLP researcher can usually stump a state-of-the-art reading comprehension system within a few tries. Onereliable techniqueis to probe the system’s model of the world, which can leave even the much-ballyhooed GPT-3babblingabout cycloptic blades of grass.
Imbuing automated readers with world models will require major innovations in system design, as discussed inseveralTheme-tracksubmissions. But our argument is more basic: however systems are implemented, if they need to have faithful world models, then evaluations should systematically test whether they have faithful world models.
Stated so baldly, that may sound obvious, but it’s rarely done. Research groups like theAllen Institute for AIhaveproposedother ways to harden the evaluations, such as targeting diverse linguistic structures, asking questions that rely on multiple reasoning steps, or even justaggregatingmanybenchmarks. Other researchers, such asYejin Choi’s group at the University of Washington, have focused on testingcommonsense, which pulls in aspects of a world model. Such efforts are helpful, but they generally still focus on compiling questions that today’s systems struggle to answer.
We’re proposing a more fundamental shift: to construct more meaningful evaluations, NLP researchers should start by thoroughly specifying what a system’s world model should contain to be useful for downstream applications. We call such an account a “template of understanding.”One particularly promising testbed for this approach is fictional stories. Original stories are information-rich, un-Googleable, and central to many applications, making them an ideal test of reading comprehension skills. Drawing on cognitive science literature about human readers, our CEODavid Ferruccihas proposed a four-part template for testing an AI system’s ability to understand stories.
By systematically asking these questions about all the entities and events in a story, NLP researchers can score systems’ comprehension in a principled way, probing for the world models that systems actually need.
It’s heartening to see the NLP community reflect on what’s missing from today’s technologies. We hope this thinking will lead to substantial investment not just in new algorithms, but in new and more rigorous ways of measuring machines’ comprehension. Such work may not make as many headlines, but we suspect that investment in this area will push the field forward at least as much as the next gargantuan model.
Jesse Dunietzis a researcher atElemental Cognition, where he works on developing rigorous evaluations for reading comprehension systems. He is also an educational designer for MIT’sCommunication Laband ascience writer.
byJesse DunietzSharePopularDeep DiveArtificial intelligenceArtificial intelligence is creating a new colonial world orderAn MIT Technology Review series investigates how AI is enriching a powerful few by dispossessing communities that have been dispossessed before.
Meta has built a massive new language AI—and it’s giving it away for freeFacebook’s parent company is inviting researchers to pore over and pick apart the flaws in its version of GPT-3This horse-riding astronaut is a milestone in AI’s journey to make sense of the worldOpenAI’s latest picture-making AI is amazing—but raises questions about what we mean by intelligence.
How the AI industry profits from catastropheAs the demand for data labeling exploded, an economic catastrophe turned Venezuela into ground zero for a new model of labor exploitation.
Stay connectedGet the latest updates fromMIT Technology ReviewDiscover special offers, top stories, upcoming events, and more.
Thank you for submitting your email!It looks like something went wrong.
We’re having trouble saving your preferences. Try refreshing this page and updating them one more time. If you continue to get this message, reach out to us atcustomer-service@technologyreview.comwith a list of newsletters you’d like to receive.
MIT Technology ReviewOur in-depth reporting reveals what’s going on now to prepare you for what’s coming next.
Subscribeto support our journalism.
AboutHelp© 2022 MIT Technology Review
