old id = 799
▷ Best Casino Sites for 2022 ✔️ UK's Top 10 Online Casinos
2022
https://www.bestcasinosites.net

By visiting our website, you agree to ourTerms of Use, ourPrivacy Policy, and ourCookies Policy. Our website contains advertisement. You must be lawfully permitted to gamble in your country of access.
Online Gambling in the USA: Best Casino Sites on the US Market<\/h2>Unfortunately our best casino site listings are currently valid for customers from the UK only. To learn more about the legality of online gambling in the US, continue through to our overview.<\/p>"\/images\/geo\/geo-coming-soon-mobile.jpg\" media=\"(max-width: 599px)\">"\/images\/geo\/geo-coming-soon.jpg\" media=\"(min-width: 600px)\">"\/images\/geo\/geo-coming-soon.jpg\"><\/picture><\/div>"geopopup-cta\">"\/usa\/\" class=\"cta-btn\">Read More!<\/a><\/div>\n <\/div>\n <\/div>\n <\/div>\n <\/div>","welcome-text":""welcome-text\" class=\"ico-flag-united-states\">Greetings to the United States!<\/span>","countrycode":"US","country":"United States","state":"CA"};BestCasinoSites.netBest Casino SitesCasino GuidesBecome a gambling expert!Slot SitesNew Slot SitesRoulette SitesBlackjack SitesCasino ReviewsSafe Online CasinosMobile CasinosOther Gambling ProductsFind even more entertainmentBetting SitesE-Sports Betting SitesPoker SitesBingo SitesLotto SitesGambling SitesDaily Fantasy SportsReal MoneyPayment MethodsSafe Transactions OnlinePayPalBitcoinDebit CardsSkrillNetellerPaysafecardNeosurfApple PayMuchBetterRevolutBet SizeCasinos Suited to Your BankrollHigh StakesLow StakesNo Wagering Casino£5 Deposit Casinos£10 Deposit CasinosBest Casino PayoutsFast Payout CasinosCasino BonusLive CasinosLive Casino GuideFind the Best Live Dealer CasinosLive Casinos with PayPalLive Casino Bonus OffersLive Casino AppsNew Live Casino SitesLive Dealer GamesPlay with the Best Real DealersOnline Live RouletteLive Blackjack OnlineLive Baccarat OnlineLive Three Card PokerBlogToggle NavigationThe Best Online Casino Sites for 2022We’ve listed, rated and reviewed the most popular British online casinos.
To start playing safely, choose from our list of thetop 10 best casino sites in the UK:The Best Casino Sites in the UK for 2022🥇 Betiton Casino (Best Casino Site in the UK)🥈 Duelz Casino (Recommended Casino Bonus for British Players)🥉 Grosvenor Casino (Top-Rated Live Casino Games in the UK)🏅 Grand Ivy Casino (Quality Casino with High Payouts)🏅 Griffon Casino (Excellent Selection of New Slots)🏅 MRQ Casino (Best Slingo Games Catalogue)🏅 Ladbrokes (Great Online Casino Site for Blackjack Players)🏅 Merkur Slots (Top UK Online Casino for Roulette Games)🏅 Monopoly Casino (Top-Rated Free Spins Bonus)🏅 Coral Casino (Best for Caribbean Stud Poker)The Best Online Casino Sites with UK Licence for 2022🥇 Online Casino🛡️ UKGC Licence⭐ RatingBetiton Casino394835.00Duelz Casino486954.95Ladbrokes Casino547434.95Grand Ivy Casino528944.90Griffon Casino394834.90MRQ Casino512504.85Grosvenor Casino387504.85Merkur Slots581604.80Monopoly Casino389054.80Coral Casino547434.75⭐ Best Casino Sites🛡️ Online Casino Safety🎰 Casino Games⚖️ Highest Payout Casinos🎁 Top Bonus Offers💸 PayPal Casinos🤑 No Wagering OffersGreetings to the United States!Check Out the Best Online Casinos for MayThe BestOnline Casinos– 2022 RankingsSort Casinos ByTop RatedMost PopularHighest Bonus PercentageFree SpinsNewest CasinosCasino SiteSign Up BonusHighlightsCasino RatingSecure LinkSignificant Terms1.
Betway$/€1000Welcome BonusFair Welcome Bonus,Microgaming & Evolution Gaming,Huge Game Selection4.98★ out of 5casino.betway.com18+, New customers only. Opt-in required. 100% Match Bonus up to €/$250 on 1st deposit of €/$20+. 25% Match Bonus up to €/$250 on 2nd deposit. 50% Match Bonus up to €/$500 on 3rd deposit. 50x bonus wagering applies as do weighting requirements. Credit Card, Debit Card & PayPal deposits only. Irregular gameplay may invalidate your bonus. Terms Apply.
2.
Spin Casino1000€Welcome BonusSecure and Mobile Friendly,600-plus Casino Games,Microgaming Casino4.95★ out of 5www.spincasino.com18+, New Players Only. 1st Deposit - Match Bonus up to 400€ • 2nd / 3rd Deposit - Match Bonus up to 300€ • New customers only • Min deposit 10€ • 50x wagering • Terms Apply3.
22bet300€+ 22 Bet PointsGreat Mobile Apps,Accepts Cryptocurrency,High-Quality Live Games4.93★ out of 522bet.com18+, New Players Only; 100% bonus up to 300 EUR + 22 Bet Points for the casino. 50x the bonus amount; min deposit €1; €5 max stake; Bonus is valid 7 days; Games contribute differently. See Full T&C. Play responsibly4.
Jackpot City$1,600in Casino BonusesMicrogaming Casino,Daily Promotions,Loyalty Benefits4.90★ out of 5www.jackpotcitycasino.com18+, 1st / 2nd / 3rd / 4th Deposit - Match Bonus up to $400 • New customers only • Min deposit $10 • 50x wagering • Terms apply5.
Casino Las Vegas500€+ 50 Free SpinsAn Exceptional Playtech Casino,Superb Promotions,Great Payout Rates4.87★ out of 5www.casinolasvegas.com18+, New players only. 100% Welcome Bonus up to €500 + 50 Free Spins. Min. deposit €20. 20x (deposit + bonus) wagering requirements within 30 days. When accepted, a popup will display a list of games on which the 50 free spins can be played. 20x wins from spins WR. See full terms for standard game stake contribution. Play responsibly.
6.
Ruby Fortune750€Welcome BonusBiggest Online Jackpot Guaranteed,Over 450 Microgaming Games,Excellent Mobile Gaming4.85★ out of 5www.rubyfortune.com18+, 1st / 2nd / 3rd Deposit - Match Bonus up to 250€ • New customers only • Min deposit 10€ • 50x wagering • Terms Apply7.
Casino.com$400+ 200 spinsImpressive Welcome Bonus,The Best Playtech Games,Favorable Loyalty Programme4.80★ out of 5www.casino.com18+, New Customers. Spins: 20 after signing, 180 after deposit - 20 immediately and a further 20 per day for the next eight days after depositing, 20x wagering. Max winnings of $100, paid as bonus funds. Welcome Bonus: $20 min deposit, max bonus $400, wagering 40x. Game weights apply. Betting Limits - Slots: $5 All Other Games: 10% of Bonus Amount. Skrill & Neteller excluded from offer. Play resposibly. Full T&C apply.
8.
888casino$200/£100/140€on your 1st DepositUnique Games,Impressive Bonus Variety,Exclusive Live Games4.78★ out of 5www.888casino.com18 +. New players only • €20 min deposit • 100% up to $200/£100/€140 Bonus • Bonus wins are capped at €500 • To withdraw bonus & related wins, wager 30 x (bonus amount) within 90 days • Restrictions apply to deposit until wagering requirement fulfilled • Wagering req. vary by game • This offer may not be combined with any other offer • Withdrawal restrictions & full T&Cs apply9.
Royal Panda100€BonusInnovative Design & Software,Huge Progressive Jackpots,Good Game Selection4.75★ out of 5www.royalpanda.com18+, first deposit only. 100% matched bonus up to €100. Min. dep: €10. Deposit restrictions apply. Free spins: Starburst only, no deposit required. Wagering: x35. T&Cs apply.
10.
Genesis Casino1000€+ 300 Free SpinsPlentiful Selection of Games,Mobile Friendly Casino,Weekly Promos and Bonuses4.72★ out of 5www.genesiscasino.com18+ Full T&C's Apply. New players Only. €10 min deposit. €5 max bet using bonus. 40x wagering applies. Bonus valid for 14 days. 30 Spins on Starburst games will be credited per day for 9 days after qualifying deposit/wager is met. Free Spins valid for 72 hours from credit. Max Free Spins winnings €100. Skrill + Neteller excluded. 100% up to €100 + 300 spins on 1st deposit. 50% up to €300 on 2nd deposit with code WGEN2, 25% up to €300 for 3rd and 4rh with codes WGEN3 and WGEN4. Always refer to Bonus Terms - www.begambleaware.orgBritish casino players have the highest standards forwhere they put their money in. That’s why, in the UK, the most popular real money games websites happen to also be the best ones. That has been confirmed by many expert players, including the ones that work with us. They, in fact, have tested and reviewed over 100 of the biggest online casinos in the UK and ranked them according to our pre-determined criteria – game selection, welcome bonus offers and regular promotions, mobile compatibility, and live dealer games.
All of that with the sole purpose of finding out which are the casinos that offer a great user experience and are worth your time the most! The result you just saw above – a ranking list of thetop 10 best casino sites in the UK. Our ranking can help you find a top UK online casino to suit you. We are committed to ranking and reviewing real money casinos to bring you only top-rated sites that you can trust.
This top 10 casino list is updated every month, so you will always find valid casino bonuses and reliable honest information here.
We will only ever list UKGC-licensed casinos. As such, when you play at any of our best UK online casino websites, you can enjoy the peace of mind knowing that your casino experience will be safe. Our long-term goal is to make bestcasinosites.net the number one casino comparison site in the world and a trusted source for all things gambling. If you are a casino player that puts their security first, then we are confident that you will find your preferredsafe online casinoeasily.
The Top Online Casinos for Different PlayersThe online gambling industry has been one of the fastest-developing businesses in the world for more than a decade. Playing online slots and table games isa preferred spare time activityfor millions of UK residents, so it’s no surprise that new online casino sites are popping up almost every other day.
Andwith such high competition, it is not easy to stand out from the crowd. That’s why the top UK casino sites invest massive amounts in the development of their gaming platforms. They all rely on different, proven strategies for attracting new casino players and keeping the current players base satisfied. Some count on the wide range of games, while others depend on the attractiveness of rewarding deposit bonuses.
And the wide diversity of gambling services at the best UK casino sitescan only be beneficialfor the players. Every gambler has certain expectations and preferences, so the massive variety of online casino sites is a huge advantage. You can pick the top online casino site that meets your taste and will grant you the gambling opportunities that you desire.
Most of the top casinos in the UK have many similarities in terms of welcome bonus offers, slot games, progressive jackpot slots, table games, live dealer tables, customer support services and more. Still, there are some operators that have walked the extra mile and have managed to deliver something extra special. Have a look at the provided table, where we have handpickedthe best English casino sitesin different gaming categories for your convenience.
If you are wondering what is the best online casino for you, there is one factor that should always be your number one priority, and that is security. You should only play at regulated online casino sites that possess a licence from the UK Gambling Commission. All the best British online casinos are licensed. This guarantees you’ll be playing in asafe and fair gambling environment, and you will have a pleasant online casino experience.
We can happily confirm that all online casinos in the UK that you will see on this and other pages on our website possess this gambling certificate, so you shouldn’t waste any sleep on theirauthenticity, security and fairness.
How to Register at a Casino Site and Start PlayingThe best UK online casinos go out of their way to make the registration process easy for you. It will generally take you a matter of minutes to create an account at new casino sites, make a deposit, andstart playing real money games. Still, it is worth keeping in mind that you will need to provide a fair few details to create a casino account.
When you join a casino site, you can expect to provide various details including your name, address, and date of birth. This is to comply with the strict standards set by the UK Gambling Commission. The Commission’s main responsibility is to protect players, and they require detailed information to prevent underage gambling, money laundering, and problem gambling.
Here you can see the steps to followto register and play at an online casino site.
Guide to the Best Online Casinos in the United Kingdom – How We RankAll good online casino sites have certain common traits and comply withthe highest standards of the gambling industry. If you’re planning on playing at English casino sites for real cash, then it’s crucial for you to learn how to assess the quality of the casino site and make sure that it’s not rigged. To help you find the best online casino UK sites, we’ve narrowed down the criteria according to which the experts choose where to play at to the 6 most important ones:When rating online casinos, we always considerfirst and foremost the securityof the operator. Only after that, we start evaluating everything else, from games and welcome bonuses to customer support and accepted payments. We test numerous features of both old and new casino sites, in order to separate the most worthy gambling platforms. You can find more information about how we rank online casinos onthis page.
Security Comes First at UK Online Casino Sites!When real money gaming is involved,there’s nothing more important than the safetyand the fairness of the casino site. The first thing you should do when checking a casino site you haven’t played at yet is whether or not it’s licensed by the official gambling authority of the country you’re residing in. For British players that’s pretty simple – check if it’s licensed by the United Kingdom Gambling Commission as this is the only organisation that issues remote gambling licences in Great Britain.
Other European countries also havetheir own gambling authorities, but most of them recognise the licences of external institutions as well. Some of the other licences you will often encounter at gambling sites are the ones issued by the Gibraltar Gambling Authority, the Malta Gaming Authority, Antigua & Barbuda’s Directorate of Offshore Gaming and the Alderney Gambling Control Commission, since taxation and gambling laws in these jurisdictions are more convenient.
UK Gambling Commission LicenceThe Gambling Commission was established under the Gambling Act 2005. It is responsible for regulating gambling in Great Britain. Furthermore, since the introduction of the Gambling (Licensing and Advertising) Act 2014, any operator intending to accept players in Britain must obtain a licence from the Commission. For this reason, British players should only play at UKGC-licensed casinos, as this ensuresthe casino site is operating legally.
Likewise, for players worldwide,a UK licence is a clear signthat an online casino is legit and not a scam site. The key objectives of the UKGC include preventing criminal activity, namely money laundering. They also protect children and vulnerable people from gambling-related harm. The Commission also ensures that gambling is conducted fairly and in an open way. A UKGC licence is the single most reliable way of knowing that a UK casino site is trustworthy. Furthermore, many of thebest casinos in the worldabide by UKGC regulations.
Not only must British online casino sites meet strict standards to obtain a licence, they are also closely regulated to verify that they are maintaining them.
The Gambling Commission carries out assessments on licenseesto ensure that they are complying with the licensing requirements. Operators are regulated according to the licence conditions and codes of practice (LCCP).
This includes everything fromtechnical standards for protecting your personal datato independent testing of games to verify their integrity. It sets clear standards regarding welcome bonus offers, verifying underage gambling is prevented and other player protection measures. The Commission are not shy in upholding these standards either, taking regulatory action in the shape of huge fines or the retraction of gambling licences where operators fail to meet their obligations. On our platform, you can see anUK online casinos listwith all approved operators.
Casino Testing AgenciesFair games are a mustif you want to play with real cash. Yet how can you be confident that the casino slots and table games are not rigged when you play at a UK online casino site? Well, as we mentioned earlier, an operator must invite independent testing of their games as part of licensing and regulatory standards. There are a selection oftrusted independent test housesthat verify the integrity of games. Some of the leading testing agencies include eCOGRA, iTech Labs and GLI.
Such testing authorities perform technical audits of all games and produce payout reports showing how much of all players’ money is returned as winnings across all games on offer at a casino. They perform rigorous testing of the random number generator (RNG) to confirm that game outcomes are trulyrandom and not fixed in any way. Reputable English online casinos will also share these monthly payout reports on their sites, providing transparency and reassurance that the games can be trusted.
Casino AwardsWinning a prestigious industry award speaks volumes about a casino’s merit. There are a range of awards ceremonies thatrecognise excellence across the online gambling industry.
The most important ones include the Global Gaming Awards, the EGR Awards, the IGA awards and the Global Regulatory Awards.
When we review online casinos, we check out any accolades that have been gained by the operator. With awards that recognise the number one operator, mobile app, game, social responsibility and more, winners of these titles stand out from the crowd. You can find out more aboutthe most important awards in the gambling industrybelow.
Not all good online casinos have such awards but every time you see a casino site that bears one of these awards symbols you can be sure that you are looking at one of the best online casinos on the Internet. After all, these prestigious organisationsaward only reputable and trustworthyonline casino sites.
Responsibility in GamblingFor most people, gambling is fun. Yet others could develop a serious gambling problem. The top online casino operators we review on our site all promoteresponsible gambling. They offer youvarious self-help toolsto manage the time and money you spend gambling. They also invest significantly in training their staff to recognise problem gambling behaviours and to be able to offer advice to anyone experiencing a gambling problem.
Reputable casinos partner with responsible gambling organisationsthat specialise in the prevention of gambling addiction and the provision of help and treatment to anyone affected by problem gambling behaviour. Some such leading organisations include GamCare, GAMSTOP, GambleAware, Gamblers Anonymous, and the Responsible Gambling Trust. You will see the logos of such organisations displayed on the websites of reliable casinos. Please gamble responsibly when playing with real money stakes. And if you need help with problem gambling behaviour, contacting these organisations is a good way to get the help you need.
The Safest Casinos on the InternetOne thing is for sure: you should never gamble with your safety when you play real money casino games online. You will provide sensitive personal information when you create a casino account and make deposits online. As such, you need to have complete confidence that your data will be safeguarded and you’ll have all the needed tools to play responsibly. The best casino site is always a safe one. Here are a few ofthe safest online casinos in the UK:All good online casinos are officially licensed and use sophisticated technical security to encrypt transactions and keep your personal data completely protected against interception. The best UK casinos online are also regularly audited toverify that games are safe to playand that technical standards are being met.
Responsible gambling is promotedat top casino sites UK players can opt for. The operators offer tools to help players restrict or control their gambling habits. Furthermore, reputable UK online casino sites also have clearly displayed T&Cs and a solid privacy policy. Let us remind you that you can enjoy a safe user experience at all casinos featured on this page.
The UK’s Most Popular Online Casino Games – A Comprehensive ListOne of the most important criteria in finding a top casino site is undoubtedly the game selection on offer. The good thing about online casino operators is that they don’t have any restrictions in terms of how many games they can add to their sites, unlike brick and mortar casinos. Still,all UK casino sites have different game selectionsdepending on which software houses they work with.
These collections differ in number, quality and diversity, but usually consist for the most part of different video slots, progressive jackpot slots, some table and card games, plus live dealer games. Also, there might be some video poker, scratch cards and arcade games, though not all top online casinos UK players can choose from feature them. You should choose a site that features alarge and diverse game selectionwith the types of games that you want to play.
The Best Online Casino Games in the UK:Most of thetop 20 online casinos UKfeature a great number of the above-listed game types but it’s always good to consider thatthe variety of online casino games selectionsdiffers greatly from website to website. Let’s say you want to play Texas Hold’em Bonus Poker – a very specific title. It’s definitely better to first check if the casino site has the game before registering and depositing.
Another thing that’s worth checking is theminimum and maximum limitsthat you can bet on a game – especially important information for high rollers seeking the best casino sites. If you want to play with the highest stakes, live dealer games are usually the best option.
The Best RTP Casino GamesWhen choosing which games to play at the best UK online casinos, you should keep RTP in mind. The return to player percentage tells you how much a game pays back to players as winnings overall. As such,the higher the RTP, the greater the expectation of profits. Blackjack and video poker games generally feature the highest RTP rates. And as you can see from the list above, some online slots also feature high payout rates.
Best Casino for Online Slot MachinesVisit any online casino websites and you’ll find that online slots dominate the game selection. This is great news for slots players as you will never be stuck for a choice. Yet a casino slots selection can vary greatly, depending on the slot providers they use to provide their slot game portfolio. Some of the top casino sites use a single leading software provider to exclusively power their slot game selection. Others handpickgames from numerous developers, to offer a diverse range of video slots and progressive jackpot slots from both leading game developers and specialist bespoke design studios.
A good slots casino will boast hundreds of games,with a wide range of themes and special features.
They will also offer slot-related welcome offer bonus promotions, and feature progressive jackpot slots. If you want to play slots with real money online, check out our top recommended slots sites for UK players:There are plenty of enticing match bonuses and welcome bonus packages on offer for new customers at the best UK online casinos that are ideal for playing slots from top slot providers. You will also find that many of the best UK casino sites offerfree spins on selected gamesas part of their welcome bonus deal. However, they are unlikely to be available for slots with progressive jackpots. Yet to find thebest bonus for slots, you need to keep a few factors in mind.
The biggest welcome bonus offers do not always provide the most convenient deal. You also need tocheck for fair bonus termslinked to playthrough requirements, validity periods for a bonus money reward and extra spins, minimum deposit, and game restrictions before deciding whether to opt-in. You should watch out for any excluded slots or live dealer casino games, and any that have a smaller game weighting towards the bonus wagering requirement. Be aware also that free spins usually have a shorter validity.
Additionally, most of the times the rewarded bonus spins can be played only on specific slots. You shouldalways read all bonus conditionsto be sure you understand the offer before you accept it. That way you can be confident that you are getting a good deal.
Rest assured that all top casino sites clearly display their promotional terms. And if you want to have a go at thenew online slot sitesthen you should simply follow the link and see what we have in store for you! The newest sites are a great place toplay slots with progressive jackpots.
Top Rated Roulette Sites for BritsRoulette is one of the most popular casino games and you’ll find it at all of the best UK casino sites. The classic game of chance is simple to play and offers the potential for attractive rewards. It is a popular choice with both beginners and experienced players alike. The best roulette sites will feature the3 most popular classic versions of the game: European, French and American, with table limits to cater to all types of UK players. Aside from traditional versions of the game, you can also find plenty of interesting variants,Innovative roulette variants provide unique gameplay and even progressive jackpots. Furthermore, the top roulette sites feature deposit bonuses that are great for playing the game. If you want to know which online casino is best for roulette players,check out these top casino sites:If you want to play RNG or live roulette games with a casino bonus,there are a few things you need to look out for. This game has a low house edge, and as such, some operators exclude the game from their welcome bonus altogether. When roulette is included, it will often have a lower weighting, meaning only a percentage of all wagers on the game will only contribute towards clearing the wagering requirement.
It is also worth keeping your eyes peeled for special table game deposit bonuses. These often offer morefavourable conditions for playing rouletteand can be a great choice for roulette players. However, if you want to get the best out of this game, live roulette games come highly recommended. Check ourbest online live roulette UKguide where the action will get you hyped as you play with a real dealer!Top Online Blackjack SitesBlackjack is a firm favourite with many players and all good online casinos offer the game. The game allows you to put your skills to use, rather than simply relying on chance. When played with the optimum strategy, you can reduce the house edge to a fraction to increase your chances of success. The best UK casino sites for blackjack feature many versions of the much-loved card game. As well as classic game variants, they also offera range of exciting and innovative variantsthat tweak the rules to provide a uniquely entertaining casino experience.
You can alsoplay against a real live dealerwith live blackjack featured at all top casino sites the UK has to offer. Want to know what is the best online casino to play blackjack? Check out our recommended casino operators for UK plackjack players:Whilst the game selection is key to finding a top blackjack casino site, another factor that makes operators stand out is casino offers with conditions that favour blackjack players. Whilst there are somefirst deposit bonusesspecifically available for this card game, they are rare.
However, you will find that you can play the game with many casino welcome bonus offers. The important thing to remember is tocheck for favourable wagering requirementsand weightings for blackjack. Fair and achievable playthrough requirements are essential for spotting thebest bonuses for playing blackjack online.
The Online Casinos That Pay Out the BestIf you want to win money playing games of chance, then you will no doubt be interesting in learning which UK casino sites have the highest payouts. Each game offered at quality casinos has a theoretical RTP. This return to player percentage expresses how much money bet on the game will be paid back to players over the long run. Whilstcasino slots have a wide range of RTPs, generally speaking, table game variants and video poker offer the possibility of higher returns. Whereas slots with progressive jackpots usually feature a lower RTP.
Licensed casino operators are audited by independent testing agencies every month. These testing bodies produce payout reports that detail the exact percentage of all money bet at the online casino that has been paid out as winnings. As such, you can find the best paying casinos by checking which hasthe highest percentage listed in their payout reports.
Keep in mind that the payout percentage of a casino site will change every month. Yet it is a good guide to finding theonline casinos in the UK that pay out the best. Consideration should also be given to how fast withdrawals are processed, with the highest payout casinos providing swift, hassle-free withdrawals.
The Top Casino Bonus Offers in the UKA real highlight of playing casino games at an online casino site is thegenerous casino bonusesand real money reward offers that you can take advantage of. There is no shortage of deposit offers and welcome bonuses up for grabs, with operators providing a big bonus amount or ticket value to entice you to join. New player bonuses come in all sizes. You will find deals that match your first qualifying deposit with bonus funds. Others come as a package deal, where you earn bonuses over a number of deposits.
Many welcome bonus offers also include free spins for a certain slot game. What they all have in common however is that they extend your playing time and give you more opportunities to win. Below, you can seethe 4 best casino bonus offersthat are currently available for UK players:All top casino sites offer bonuses. And whilst casino promotions and welcome bonuses are undoubtedly an advantage for players, they can also be the cause of complaints. This is because some casino players, particularly new customers, are unfamiliar with thewagering requirements attached to casino offers, and simply choose an offer based on the bonus amount or ticket value.
The playthrough requirementsdetermine how many times you need to play through the welcome bonus before you can withdraw the bonus wins you make with it. Any free spin winnings could also include a wagering requirement. Also important is the weighting of different games and their wagering contributions. Whilst slot games usually count entirely towards welcome bonus wagering, some game types, such as roulette and video poker, tend to have a smaller game weighting, in the region of 10-20%.
Some bonuses exclude some selected games entirely from wagering contributions. It is therefore really important tocheck the bonus terms and conditionsfor favourable conditions for the range of games you want to play. The terms will also list the bonus code or promo code needed to claim an offer if such is required. In ourfull list of the best casino bonuses and latest offers, you will find many examples of welcome bonuses and other casino promotions that are valid for all types of games.
You should also be aware of the minimum amount needed to claim the casino bonuses. Plus,check the validity period, so you know how long you have to meet the wagering requirements before the welcome bonus, extra spins, and bonus wins expire. We should also mention that casino bonuses are not limited to a welcome offer for new customers. The UK’s top casino sites offer various promotions and loyalty rewards that could enhance your casino experience. You could also benefit from welcome offers, exclusive promo code deals, and entry to a VIP program.
Safe Casino Software with Many Available GamesThe top UK casino sites do not generally power their platforms themselves. Instead, they turn to specialist software providers to create their casino websites. The overall user experience and game availability at an online casino can differ significantly depending on which software an operator uses to power their platform and games.
Reliable software with many gamesis imperative for a casino site to be considered one of the best. Top quality software ensures that the casino platform is fast, intuitive and safe to use, with games that run smoothly without crashing. It also embraces multi-platform gaming, with games working flawlessly on desktop and mobile devices.
We have already mentioned that UK online casinos are subject to strict regulation from the United Kingdom Gambling Commission and other authorities. The same is true of software developers and slot providers. They must alsoadhere to high standards and hold valid licencesto be able to power the best online casino sites and provide games. The software must meet high levels of technical security, ensuring that the player’s sensitive data is protected, and transactions are encrypted. Games are also independently tested and audited to verify that they are fair.
The Best Casino Software ProvidersThere are dozens of software providers that specialise in the development of online casino platforms and games. Yet of the many software houses in operation, there are3 that stand outthe most. You will find their games at many of the best British online casinos.
Playtechare a world-renowned gambling software provider. They are pioneers of the industry, and a provider of download, instant-play, mobile and live dealer casino platforms. They boast a diverse range of top-quality games.
Microgamingare one of the oldest software providers in the iGaming industry, with over 20 years experience of providing quality online gambling platforms. They boast the biggest selection of casino games by far. Plus, their network of progressive jackpots is the biggest around.
NetEntmay not offer the largest game portfolio, yet it is perfectly formed. NetEnt games are famed for their exceptional graphical quality and innovative features, with arguably the top rated slots in the online casino industry.
Live Dealer Casino SoftwareLive dealer casino games are all the rage and playing with a real croupier is the preference for many players. Whilst many enjoy the convenience and accessibility of playing casino games online, for some, they lack the buzz and atmosphere that you experience playing in a brick and mortar casino. As such, live casino games provide a great solution. Theyhelp to bridge the gapbetween playing online or in a land-based location.
Whilst there is no shortage of casino developers in the industry when it comes to live dealer casino gaming, there are significantly fewer providers that develop live dealer games. And the live table game availability varies between developers. Of the companies that develop live casino games, there is one provider that isthe undisputed leader – Evolution Gaming.
The specialist live casino developer boaststhe largest and most diverse selectionof games with a live dealer. Games are streamed in high definition from dedicated studios, and they even stream some games live directly from prestigious land-based casinos. And some of the streams are coming from thebest online casinos in Canada!Live dealer tables offer a more immersive gambling experience than RNG games and there are many top live casino UK sites.
You play with professional and friendly dealers, who you can interact with as you enjoy the games. Some players are suspicious of casino games, not trusting that the results are fair.
While there is no doubt that games at licensed casinos are not rigged, you get anextra level of reassurance and confidencewhen you play with real dealers at live dealer tables. Rather than relying on an RNG to provide game results, you actually see the ball spin around the roulette wheel and land on a winning number. Likewise, you see the cards being dealt in live casino games such as blackjack and poker.
If the advantages of playing live casino games were not already plentiful enough, you can alsograb some lucrative deposit bonuses, and even welcome bonus packages for live dealer games. Check out our selection of the bestnew live casinooperators to find out which are the newest online live gambling destinations in the UK. Each one offers a mobile site, enabling you to enjoy live games on the go.
Playing on the Go: The Best Casino Apps for UK PlayersWhat could be more convenient than playing real money games of chance on your mobile device? The great news is that the casino industry has embraced the trend for mobile gaming and all the top UK online casino sites have developed top-notch apps thatallow you to play on the go. The best operators have designed their casino platforms for multi-platform gaming. With mobile responsive designs, playing at a casino mobile site gives you a like for like experience of playing on a desktop PC, but with the added convenience of being able to play anytime, anywhere.
Mobile casinos are compatible with pretty much every iOS and Android mobile device, making them accessible to all. The top mobile casino apps feature a rich selection of games that arefully optimised for mobile play. They also allow you to deposit and withdraw safely from the palm of your hand. Some even offer mobile-exclusive deposit options, such as Apple Pay. Learn more in our thorough article about thebest mobile casino sites.
Customer ServiceAll the best casino sites have 24/7 customer support servicethat is ready to answer any questions and help with any problem at all hours. New customers often fail to check how they can seek help at the casino site until they’ve stumbled upon some issue, which definitely shouldn’t be the case, especially if they plan on playing for real cash. Therefore, always remember to check the working hours of the casino’s customer service and whether they support the three most popular methods of contact:Another way that you can find a solution to your problem or an answer to your question is tovisit the FAQ section of the casino site. There, the operators’ specialists collect information about the most common questions and issues players stumble upon, such as what to do if you lose your password, how to make a deposit, what is the game availability and gambling rules, how does ticket value vary, how to sign up for a deposit bonus, or how to claim the extra spins included in a welcome offer.
Both new customers and experienced players are sure to find the FAQ section useful in answering your queries. Most of the best English online casinos have FAQ sections, so make sure tocheck those casino guidesbefore you contact the customer service team.
Casino Credits and CashierOne of the biggest advantages of playing at online casino sites as opposed to at land-based ones is that the former offer you way more opportunities to claim generous casino deposit bonuses. And though there are some free bonuses available, the best welcome bonus offers are the ones that require you to make a qualifying deposit. You can do that by using one of the many payment options that online casinos accept, though it’s important to know that different UK casino sites supportdifferent online deposit options for British players.
While all operators accept bank transfers and the most popular debit cards such as VISA, Mastercard and Maestro, there are still veryfew gambling sites that accept pay by phone billmobile billing. Also, they usually support some types of e-wallet and prepaid card payments, but not all types.
British players who want to deposit with credit cards should note that deposit method restrictions apply in the UK. In an attempt to prevent problem gambling and improve safety, the UK Gambling Commission has banned the use of credit cards for gambling deposit and withdrawals in the UK. This applies to land based casinos as well as online sites. Here’s an overview of thesupported payment methods at the top 10 UK online casinos:*Limits may apply from the payment processor.
When deciding which deposit options to use at an online casino, you should pay attention to the deposit limits. Some deposit options, such as prepaid cards and mobile billing have relatively low maximum deposit limits. Others, such as e-wallets and bank transfers tend to feature much higher limits. While limits apply to deposits,no withdrawal limitsare in place at casinos in the UK.
According to UK gambling rules and licensing conditions, an online casino cannot apply limits on how much you can withdraw from your casino player account. Still, withdrawal terms could differ depending on the payment processor. Another detail you should keep in mind when checking the accepted deposit options is thesupported currencies. All players residing in the United Kingdom should, of course, make sure that the casino site supports theBritish Poundwhich should be the case if the casino is really licensed by the UK Gambling Commission.
As for the non-UK players, they should checkif the online casino site supports the currencyof their country. You can still play at a casino site that doesn’t support your currency as long as it’s legal in your country, but you should keep in mind that most gambling operators apply small taxes for currency exchange in their deposit and withdrawal terms.
Recommended PayPal CasinosIf you are not certain which method to use, let us recommendPayPal – one of the safest and fastest payment methods that online casinos accept. This e-wallet might not be supported by all top online casinos UK players can play at but is a great pick because it allows you toconceal your banking details from the casino, unlike when using debit cards.
On top of that,PayPal supports over 26 currencies, making it a preferred payment method for players from many different countries. Good alternative payment methods to PayPal are Skrill, Neteller and paysafecard. The worst is probably the bank transfer.
Online Casino Reviews – How Do the Sites in Our Top 10 Compare?It can be a tough job identifying the best UK online casino sites and then deciding which online casino is best for you. Of course,a United Kingdom licence is a mustto ensure the casino is legal. Yet all legal UK casinos, regardless of it’s a new casino or an old one, have both advantages and disadvantages. To assess a casino site, and find the right choice for your personal needs, there are various factors to take into consideration.
The quality and diversity of the game selection is important, including the live dealer and mobile games. UK casino sites also offer different options for depositing and withdrawing, as well as featuring different limits and timescales. Welcome bonus offers are also important, with fair terms for the games you want to play. Excellent customer service is also a common feature at quality casinos. In the table below, you can find a helpfulcomparison of our top 10 casino sites in the UK.
Our comparison table will help youselect the right online casino to suit your preferences. You can see at a glance how many real money games each operator has to offer. You can also check out the mobile game selection, as well as the provider of the live casino software. We know that bonuses matter a great deal to players. So, we have also listed each operator’s welcome bonus, as well as the key terms for each offer. Below, we recap how to select the best online gaming sites.
How to Choose the Best Online CasinosThe #1 Recommended Online Casino for May 2022We leave no stone unturned when it comes to finding the best UK casino sites to recommend to our readers. We continuously check how operators are performing to ensure you only find thecrème de la crèmeon our site.
We keep a close eye on deposit bonus offers, special promos, welcome bonus spins, new casino games, VIP programs and more to make sure that our top 10 UK online casinos list is up to date. Taking into account all the data that we have collected from our casino reviews, we can present to youthe best casino site for the month:Blacklisted Casino SitesYou should know that there are blacklisted online casino sites out there that you should avoid. However, given the strong and reliable regulation enforced by the UK Gambling Commission, such dodgy casino operators don’t last very long. To make sure you are not playing at a rogue site, you shouldonly choose operators featured on bestcasinosites.net. We check licensing and safety as part of our casino reviews. And only trusted gambling sites that are safe for British players are featured on this site.
Online Casino GalleryOnline Casino 101: Frequently Asked QuestionsWe aim to provide a completely comprehensive and useful guide to online casinos. An important part of our research involves identifying the questions that experienced players and new customers at new casino sites usually ask, thenanswering them fully and clearly. In the following section, you will find the most frequently asked online-casino related questions from newcomers.
🎰 Which is the best online casino site in the UK?The best online casino site in the UK offers a combination of great games, a rewarding welcome bonus, extra spins, reliable software and high levels of security and player protection. There are so many UK casino sites competing for your custom, that they areconstantly trying to surpass each other. Competition between old and new casinos means they regularly update their deposit bonus, welcome offer packages, and special promotions. They also strive to offer the latest releases and new casino games, and create partnerships with a diverse range of developers to ensure their game selection is expansive and unique. It is for these reasons that the #1 casino site can change frequently.
📊 Which casino site has the best odds?The casino site with the best odds is the one that has the highest combined theoretical RTP of its games and the most convenient bonus terms. Different casino games have different odds of winning. Whilst table games such as blackjack usually feature an RTP of over 99%, slot games have a much wider range of returns. Thebest lottery sites in the UKalso offer great odds of winning. Unfortunately, it is not that easy to calculate which casino site has the best odds, but you canpick a title with a high RTPand start from there. Keep in mind that table games and titles with a low house edge usually do not count entirely towards bonus wagering requirements. So, you should always check the requirements conditions of welcome bonus packages and deposit bonus offers and only play if they have convenient terms.
📈 Which online casino site has the best payouts?The online casino site that has the best payouts according to our research is the one that has the highest percentage in their payout report. Licensed casino websites are audited by independent bodies, whichanalyse payouts across all games. Testing agencies such as eCOGRA, GLI and iTech Labs create payout reports which detail the percentage of all bets placed at the casino over the month which have been returned to players as winnings. Whilst the payout report changes from one month to another, it is a good indication of how much the top UK casino sites pay out and can help you to identify which new online casino has the best payouts.
💸 Can you win money on online casinos?Yes, you can win money when you play at UK casino sites that have been licensed by the UK Gambling Commission.
Licensed and regulated UK online casinos feature fair games, which have been independently verified. As games are not fixed at legit online casino websites, then you can win real money when you play them. Furthermore, not only do regulated casinos provide you with fair games, but they also boast secure payments. Most of them also provide welcome bonus offers and even bonus spins that can boost your bankroll. So, you can be confident that once you have won money, you will be able to collect your winnings without any hassle.
🎲 What is the most popular casino game?Slots are, without a doubt the most played casino game nowadays. Thesimple rules and engaging gameplaymake slot games a favourite with UK players online. From traditional one-armed bandit style retro slots to the most graphically advanced and feature-rich video slots, there is something to appeal to every player’s individual preferences. Some online slots have progressive jackpot slots boasting payouts in the millions. There are also many welcome bonus offers with bonus spins that are specially designed for slot game machines, which makes them even more appealing.
🏆 What casino game has the best chance of winning?Blackjack is the casino game with the best chance of winning. The popular card game has a high RTP, exceeding 99%. With a house edge of less than 1%, the chances of winning are much higher than playing a slot game. Blackjack also has an optimal strategy, which can be used toreduce the house edgeto a tiny fraction. There are also some Video Poker variants which boast an RTP of above 99%, including Deuces Wild and Jacks or Better Video Poker. In a similar way to blackjack, winning in Video Poker depends mostly on the player’s skills.
💷 Which online slot machines pay the best?The online slot machines that pay the best are those with the highest RTP. The 5 online slots with the highest payouts are Goblin’s Cave (99.32%), Ugga Bugga (99.07%), Mega Joker (99%), Jackpot 6000 (98.9%) and Starmania (97.87%). The online slots that pay the best according to the biggest wins are Mega Fortune and Mega Moolah. Microgaming’s iconic Mega Moolah slotholds the world recordfor the highest ever payout from a slot machine, with its highest jackpot slots payout exceeding £13 million. These progressive jackpot slots can be found at many top UK casino sites, including most of the best new casinos.
🆓 Can you play casino games for free?Yes, you canplay casino games for free. Most online casinos offer free play demo versions of most of their games. Although live dealer casino games are the exception, as they can only be played with real cash. Playing demo casino slots enables you to get to grips with the features, whilst playing table games for free is a good way to get to know the rules and try out different gameplay strategies. Of course, when you play in demo mode,you will not enjoy the same experience. To win cash, you will need to deposit and play with real money too. You can also play casino games for free if you have claimed a first deposit bonus with free extra spins.
👑 Which is the best online gambling site?A top pick among thebest online gambling sitesaccording to our research is William Hill. The brand is a household name and synonymous with trust and integrity. The company was founded over 80 years ago and has proven to be highly reputable. William Hill offers many gambling products. Not only do they have a dominant position on British high streets with their bookmakers’ shops, but also they boast an impressive online sportsbook. You can also play bingo, poker, lotto and casino games online, withall their gambling products conveniently collatedon their site. They accept a wide range of payment methods for depositing safely, including debit cards and e-wallets . They also provide fast, hassle-free payouts. William Hill is a responsible operator and treats player protection as a top priority.
💳 Which are the best casino sites with no wagering requirements?Fortunately, the online casinos understand their players' needs and many of them have decided to offer convenientno wagering bonuses. As you can see in the table below, most operators have special bonus spins promotions with no wagering requirements. Bear in mind, however, that some welcome bonus offers and bonus spins packages might be limited to certain casino slots only. For more information about ourbest casino sites with no wagering requirement, please consult the table below.
🗺️ How Many Casinos Are There in the UK?The latest numbers show that there are over 150 casinos over and across the United Kingdom, most of which in England, with an impressive number of 28 casinos situated in London.
Some of the biggest casino chains are The Hippodrome, Grosvenor and Aspers. What would be of interest to online players is that bothGrosvenor Casinoand The Hippodrome have also virtual platforms where you can enjoy their latest games.
⚖️ Can Online Casinos Be Rigged?The online casinos that are currently registered and regulated in the UK by the United Kingdom Gambling Commission are undergoing numerous tests and are proven to be safe and reliable. The RNG (Random Number Generator) is the software that guarantees that the results of any given spin or hand at a casino site are100% random and fair.
🎁 Are there any casino bonuses at the top UK casino sites?Yes, there are many casino bonuses available at the top UK casino sites. Most gambling operators, including new casino sites and live casino sites, often offer attractive deposit bonuses and multiple regular promotions. The top first deposit bonuses for new customers include botha match-up offer and some extra spins. All welcome bonus packages and deposit bonuses have certain terms and conditions, so always make sure to check them out before signing up. Existing players can also benefit from promotions such as a loyalty scheme or VIP program.
🙋 Is playing at new casino sites recommended?Yes, as long as you're sure your selected new UK casino site is fully licensed and regulated. Normally, new casinos provide wonderful welcome bonus offers, extra spins, innovative gaming features, and the best slots and table games. New UK casino sites areconstantly popping up, trying to break into the multi-billion gambling industry, making the choice for the best casino site even more complicated.
⚙️ Which software is best for online casinos?There are various trusted software providers that provide games at the best UK online casinos. Each one islicensed by the UK Gambling Commission, ensuring their entire range of games is safe and fair. You can find the best UK online casino software providers listed in this guide, with details of their casino table games and online slots.
⏲️ Which casino site has the quickest payout?The time limits for deposit and withdrawals at English casino sites will vary depending on the payment options you use. Still, some casino operators offer faster withdrawal processing times than others. We have included a list of online casino sites that payout best on this page, to help you find thegambling sites with the fastest casino payouts.
More Interesting TopicsWe have given you all the info you need to identify the best online casinos in the UK. Yet, perhaps there is a topic you would like to learn about in more detail. Are you a high roller looking for the besthigh stakes casino, or are you more interesting in finding thebest welcome offerswith bonus spins?Perhaps you would like to find out about the hottest new casino sites on the scene? Or maybe you’re not a fan of slot games or table games, and you would like to enjoy somesports betting? Well, you can find guides to these topics andmany other gambling related subjectson our site. We also feature plenty of interesting reads in our blog. You can check out our most popular guides and blog posts here:Who Are We and Why Trust Us?Before we delve into the details, let’s start by telling you a little more about this site and the team behind it.
Online casinos are our passion. We started out as casino players and have built on our expertise over the years, putting us in a prime position to help beginners, experienced players and high rollers alike.
We are all too familiar with the minefield that exists when you search for the best casino sites UK where you can be confident you are safe and protected. Which resources are truly independent and will help you? Through our project, we aim to providereliable and accurate informationabout online gambling that you can trust.
Our team is made up of 4 casino experts, each with different interests andreal money gaming experiences. It is in this way that we can bring you a trusted site that covers a wide range of casino and gambling-related topics.
Aiden Howeis the Chief Editor and the visionary behind the entire project.
Harrison Newtonis the other founding member. The two shared a passion for playing casino games online and frustration with the lack of information and casino guides that could be trusted.
The pair launched the site in 2015 with the aim to provide avaluable and reliable information sourcefor online players.
Kiera Millerjoined the project in 2016. With a passion for casino games and slots, in particular, she brings her expertise as a player and in-depth researcher to make the site even more diverse. The team is completed byBenjamin Webb, who is the voice behind our interesting and unique blog.
Check Back with Us Regularly for More Casino Reviews and Offers!Now that you know all the basics on how to assess the quality of a casino site, it’s time for us to wish you an exciting journey in the land of online gambling! Remember to check back with us from time to time as we plan on adding even more useful articles about all things real money online casino. With many thanks to our loyal readers, we are proud to say that we areone of the best online casino review sites in the UK.
We are very grateful to this pagelisting the best online casinos UK, which gave us initial inspiration and drive to be where we are today. Whatever new casino sites you choose for your next real money gambling experience, please gamble responsibly when playing with real money stakes. Thanks for sticking around andmay luck be on your side!ReferencesCopyrightbestcasinosites.net2015-2022
