old id = 101
Ocean warrior | MIT Technology Review
2022
https://www.technologyreview.com/2022/04/27/1048561/ocean-warrior

Ocean warriorManuel Moreu, SM ’78When Manuel Moreu, SM ’78, was a child, his father was an officer in the Spanish navy, and Moreu wanted nothing more than to be an officer himself. At age five, however, side effects of antibiotics left him deaf in one ear, which meant that the navy would never take him. “Rather than operate the warships, I [decided to] build them,” he says. Now Moreu runs Seaplace, Spain’s top marine design firm, designing both military and civilian vessels. In a 40-year career, he has not only collaborated in the design of ships for the navies of Spain, Norway, and other countries but has also introduced innovations for massive new oil and gas exploration platforms in the North Sea and Brazil. More recently, the firm has moved into clean energy with new designs for offshore wind.
Moreu came to MIT to study in Course 13, Ocean Engineering (which merged with mechanical engineering in 2005), focusing on finite element analysis. “At MIT I didn’t need any coffee,” he says. “From five in the morning, I got the adrenaline I needed for the whole day. My brain was just constantly working on solutions.” After graduation, he and Jorge Sendagorta, SM ’78, founded Seaplace as a division of a British company; eventually it became a fully owned Spanish company with Moreu as president. It employs 50 naval engineers, generating $2.4 million in sales. During the 1990s, the firm designed sophisticated drill ships and floating production storage and offloading units, which combine production and storage on a vessel.
For Moreu, the thrill of naval engineering is the speed at which it operates. “I always say to new engineers: Do you want to work in aviation, where you spend 10 years improving one piece of landing equipment, or do you want to spend 10 years designing 10 different structures?” he says. A recent project has brought him back to Massachusetts, working with US energy company Avangrid to develop an 800-megawatt offshore wind project 15 miles south of Martha’s Vineyard. In Europe, Seaplace earned preliminary approval for a floating wind turbine technology that could take wind energy farther offshore.
Moreu’s sons both attended MIT for mechanical engineering; Jaime, SM ’09, now works with him on the wind projects, while Jose, SM ’21, is an engineer in the technology subsidiary HI Iberia. In October, Moreu received the Gran Cruz del Mérito Naval—the Grand Cross of Naval Merit—for service to his country. “You can imagine, since it was my dream since I was a child to be a navy officer, this was very special,” he says. “I was thinking my father was seeing that from heaven, saying, ‘Well done.’”byMichael BlandingShareThis story was part of our May/June 2022 issue.
PopularKeep ReadingMost PopularWhy China is still obsessed with disinfecting everythingMost public health bodies dealing with covid have long since moved on from the idea of surface transmission. China’s didn’t—and that helps it control the narrative about the disease’s origins and danger.
These materials were meant to revolutionize the solar industry. Why hasn’t it happened?Perovskites are promising, but real-world conditions have held them back.
Anti-aging drugs are being tested as a way to treat covidDrugs that rejuvenate our immune systems and make us biologically younger could help protect us from the disease’s worst effects.
A quick guide to the most important AI law you’ve never heard ofThe European Union is planning new legislation aimed at curbing the worst harms associated with artificial intelligence.
Stay connectedGet the latest updates fromMIT Technology ReviewDiscover special offers, top stories, upcoming events, and more.
Thank you for submitting your email!It looks like something went wrong.
We’re having trouble saving your preferences. Try refreshing this page and updating them one more time. If you continue to get this message, reach out to us atcustomer-service@technologyreview.comwith a list of newsletters you’d like to receive.
MIT Technology ReviewOur in-depth reporting reveals what’s going on now to prepare you for what’s coming next.
Subscribeto support our journalism.
AboutHelp© 2022 MIT Technology Review
