old id = 113
The Covid Tracing Tracker: What’s happening in coronavirus apps around the world | MIT Technology Review
2022
https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/12/16/1014878/covid-tracing-tracker

The Covid Tracing Tracker: What’s happening in coronavirus apps around the worldAs part of the Pandemic Technology Project, we are monitoring the development, rollout and use of contact tracing and exposure notification apps around the world. We findkey pieces of information about each service, and examine the policies that surround its use. The databases are updated on a regular basis.
The most accessible version of the database exists on the page you are reading right now.
A public version of the underlying data is kept inthis read-only spreadsheet. It is a collaborative effort, and if you have more up-to-date information on a particular app, or what's happening in a particular country or state, you can get in touch toshare that with us.
Apps being used around the worldThis is a list of every contact tracing or exposure notification app worldwide that is known to Technology Review. It was last updated on December 23, 2020.
•See the full data in this read-only spreadsheet•Read about what this database shows•Suggest an updateApps being used in the United StatesThis is a list of every contact tracing or exposure notification app in the US that is known to Technology Review. It was last updated on December 23, 2020.
•See the full data in this read-only spreadsheet•Read about what this database shows•Suggest an updateWhat the Covid Tracing Tracker containsAt the most basic level, we are compiling a list ofautomated contact tracing appsthat arebacked by national governments. These are apps designed to automatically tell users or public health officials whether somebody has potentially been exposed to covid-19; it’s what is generally known as “exposure notification.”For each one we find, there are basic questions to answer:Who is producing it?Is it released yet? Where will it be available, and on what platforms?What technologies does it use?And then, over time, we will also understand more about how each of these services works in practice, such as how many people have downloaded it andwhat level of penetration it has achieved.
But then there are more complicated issues. Is it mandatory? How private is the app? Are citizens’ rights being safeguarded? How transparent are the makers about their work? To capture this information, guided by principlesput forward by the American Civil Liberties Unionand others, we asked five questions.
For each question, if we can answer yes , the app gets a star. If we cannot answer yes—either because the answer is negative or because it is unknown—the rating is left blank. There’s also a field for notes that can help put things in context.
In addition, we say something about the basic technology underlying the app. Here’s an explanation of the key terms.
We may expand these categories over time, at which point this article will be revised.
What the database doesn’t containFirst,we arefocused on automated contact tracing and exposure notification appsthat the public is already using or will use in the near future. It does not track preliminary efforts that have no current support from national or state-level public health bodies.
Second,we aren’t monitoring manual contact tracing efforts.
Finally, and most importantly,the database isn’t a recommendation on whether to download an app or not.
It’s intended to bring you information that helps you make an informed decision on whether to use a service, and on whether to seek changes in your government’s approach.
Keeping eyes on all this information is going to require constant effort—the facts continue to evolve, the numbers change, and policies may or may not be adhered to. We may discover that what happens in theory is different from what happens in practice, or that what was promised does not end up being delivered.
How to submit a changeIf you have an update, correction, or addition to the tracker, please email the relevant information to us at CTT@technologyreview.com. Please reference original sources for your claim: government or developer announcements, verifiable news sources, or published research. We seek up-to-date information onautomated contact tracing appsthat arebacked by national or state-level governments. Data could include answers to our basic questions—What country does it operate in? What is it called? Who is producing it? Is it released yet? Where will it be available, and on what platforms? What technologies does it use? How many people have downloaded it?Or it could be specific documentation that gives insight into our list of privacy principles: Is the app voluntary? Are there limits on what data is collected and how it is shared? Will the data be destroyed in 30 days or less? And are policies publicly available or the code open sourced?Links to documents, web pages, announcements along with details of how this information applies are greatly appreciated.
Our changelogYou can view a list of themost significant changes and updates to our databases here.
byBobbie JohnsonSharePopularDeep DiveTech policySouth Africa’s private surveillance machine is fueling a digital apartheidAs firms have dumped their AI technologies into the country, it’s created a blueprint for how to surveil citizens and serves as a warning to the world.
A quick guide to the most important AI law you’ve never heard ofThe European Union is planning new legislation aimed at curbing the worst harms associated with artificial intelligence.
Inside the fierce, messy fight over “healthy” sugar techYi-Heng “Percival” Zhang was a leader in rare sugar research. Then things got sticky.
The secret police: Inside the app Minnesota police used to collect data on journalists at protestsIntrepid Response is a little-known but powerful app that lets police quickly upload and share information across agencies. But what happens to the information it collects?Stay connectedGet the latest updates fromMIT Technology ReviewDiscover special offers, top stories, upcoming events, and more.
Thank you for submitting your email!It looks like something went wrong.
We’re having trouble saving your preferences. Try refreshing this page and updating them one more time. If you continue to get this message, reach out to us atcustomer-service@technologyreview.comwith a list of newsletters you’d like to receive.
MIT Technology ReviewOur in-depth reporting reveals what’s going on now to prepare you for what’s coming next.
Subscribeto support our journalism.
AboutHelp© 2022 MIT Technology Review
