old id = 1097
Brain Aging: Models, Methods, and Mechanisms | JAMA | JAMA Network
2022
https://doi.org/10.1001%2Fjama.298.23.2798

PodcastsPublicationsTrendingSelect Your InterestsCustomize your JAMA Network experience by selecting one or more topics from the list below.
Brain Aging: Models, Methods, and MechanismsBook and Media Reviews Section Editor:John L. Zeller, MD, PhD, Contributing Editor.
Some individuals age more successfully than others. In a field dominated by youngsters, mathematician Donald Coxeter produced his last important paper at age 96 years; George Bernard Shaw, his last play at 93 years; and Grandma Moses, her last painting at 101 years. The record holder for human longevity, Madame Calment, died at age 122 years with no clinical symptoms of dementia.
So what permits some to age with their cognitive abilities largely intact, while more than half of individuals older than 80 years develop mild to severe dementias? As longevity increases, the medical and social importance of this question becomes ever more pressing, and a book such asBrain Agingis particularly welcome. However, as well written and enlightening as the book is, I find aspects of it disturbing.
The book is divided into 4 broad sections describing methods and models for assessing cognitive aging, quantifying brain changes with age, assessing functional changes in the nervous system, and summarizing specific mechanisms regulating brain aging. The introductory chapter by Elizabeth Glisky is particularly commendable. Glisky makes it clear that age-related changes in human cognitive functions differ in extent and detail from individual to individual, a fact that many other writers bury within averages and trends. Glisky also ably summarizes the various kinds of basic cognitive functions susceptible to study—attention, working memory, long-term memory, and perception—as well as higher-level cognitive functions such as language, decision-making, and executive control. While all of the essays are clearly written, well-organized, informative, and accompanied by extensive and useful bibliographies, that by Glisky provides a range and structure worth emulating.
One problem with studying brain aging in humans is that it is difficult or impossible to perform invasive experiments that might link changes in cognitive function to underlying anatomical, cellular, and metabolic changes. Thus, most of the essays focus on studies related to monkeys and rodents. The methods described range from magnetic resonance imaging, genetic profiling of cellular metabolism using RNA, and conduction velocity techniques to receptor and second-messenger studies and design-based stereology for reconstructing 3-dimensional images of histological specimens.
The range of changes in animals that can be studied with these methods is much greater than that in humans and includes signal transduction, receptor modification, stress and hormonal effects, neural plasticity, changes in blood flow, reactive oxygen species, and neuronal activation. Moreover, the direct effects of diet, exercise, and drugs are susceptible to better control and study in animals than in humans. But because cognition in rodents is relatively rudimentary compared with that in humans and monkeys, the range of functions studied by most investigators is limited to spatial learning, memory, and fear conditioning. The discrepancy between measurable rodent and human cognitive functions creates substantial issues that the book never addresses. This problem is exacerbated by the fact that the rodent studies focus on changes in the hippocampus, while the human and monkey studies focus on the forebrain. The reader is left uncertain as to which regions of the brain are the most significant for understanding functional aging.
Unfortunately, the structure of the book does not assist the reader in making sense of the diverse contributions. There is no concluding chapter synthesizing the current state of the field, discussing areas of controversy, highlighting anomalous results, or pointing to new opportunities.
As a broadly trained physiologist, I was also puzzled that the brain studies described in the book were performed almost without reference to the aging of the rest of the animal. Surely cardiovascular and pulmonary function and disease must affect brain function, as must the aging of the immune system, the increased incidence of metabolic disease, and the fact that aging patients are increasingly medicated with an ever-broader range of pharmaceutical agents, the combined cognitive effects of which are largely, if not completely, unknown. Is the absence of discussions concerning the aging brain within the context of the aging body a result of overspecialization in training, the need to focus (too narrowly!) to obtain grants, or perhaps a deeper philosophical adherence to what many now consider the outmoded Cartesian separation of mind and body? These issues should be discussed explicitly.
Finally, I cannot help but get on my hobby-horse about the need for all working scientists, particularly those writing for each other, to describe and discuss the limitations of knowledge. Investigators conduct research because of what they do not know, not because of the knowledge that they have already accumulated. What drives breakthroughs is the explicit recognition of ignorance. Every editor, whether their topic is the aging brain or any other medical topic, should have someone write a chapter about the limitations of techniques and methodologies and how these may be trapping investigators into particular types of experiments that limit their hypotheses. Conversely, investigators need to know how their theories affect and limit data collection. None of this is evident fromBrain Aging, yet only when it becomes apparent will the next generation of work in this field be catalyzed.
Financial Disclosures:None reported.
CitationRoot-Bernstein R. Brain Aging: Models, Methods, and Mechanisms.
JAMA.
2007;298(23):2796–2800. doi:10.1001/jama.298.23.2798Download citation file:© 2022Others Also LikedJAMAContentPodcastsJournal InformationSubscribeJAMANetworkPublicationsSitesFeatured ArticlesBlogsInformationJAMA Network ProductsJN LearningHelpJAMA Career Center© 2022 American Medical Association. All Rights Reserved.
Terms of Use|Privacy Policy|Accessibility Statement
