old id = 1134
The Deep Learning Indaba 2022 in Tunis: Applications Open - Deep Learning Indaba
2022
https://deeplearningindaba.com/blog/2022/03/the-deep-learning-indaba-2022-in-tunis-applications-open

Thu 17. Mar 2022The Deep Learning Indaba 2022 in Tunis: Applications OpenAfter not taking place these past two years, we excited to announce the Deep Learning Indaba for 2022 that will be held inTunis, Tunisia, from the 21st to the 26th of August. Applications to participate are now open.
An Indaba in 2022While the global pandemic still makes planning uncertain, we believe that we can again hold a gathering of the African Machine Learning and AI Community. The last Indaba was held in September 2019 in Nairobi, and we are now excited to move to North Africa and to the city of Tunis.
Everything that the Indaba has come to be known for will continue: keynote talks from global leaders, tutorials on introductory material, practical sessions that put theory into practice, but most importantly to connect with engineers, researchers, students and faculty from across our continent for one week. The pandemic has not gone away, and we have measures to ensure everyone’s safety: hosting a smaller number of people, and with a robust COVID safety plan.
Apply to JoinAs always, to attend the Indaba in person, we ask participants to complete a simple online application form, which allows us to have participants from across our continent and to ensure a mix of skills and opportunities. We hope you will apply and encourage those you know. As always, participation in the Indaba is open to all, has no registration fees for students and we offer full travel and accommodation grants for as many students as we can.
For anyone who won’t be in-person in Tunis, there will be a live-stream open to everyone.
Applications are now openand can be accessed using our Baobab platform athttps://baobab.
deeplearningindaba.com. The form will assess your motivations to attend the Indaba as well as your machine learning experience. It should take about an hour to complete. You will also need to upload a copy of your CV. The deadline to apply isThursday 14th April, 23:59:59 anywhere on earth.
VisasTo attend the Deep Learning Indaba in Tunisia, the nationals of some countries will need to apply for a visa in a Tunisian embassy prior to the event. Please refer tothis mapto see if you would need a visa. This is however only for information purpose, and we invite you to double check with the closest Tunisian embassy for the latest guidelines.
We are working with local Tunisian officials for the event organization, and will try to facilitate the procedures for you as much as possible. Once the list of participants is finalised we will:This means that you would still need to go through the usual visa application procedure, but you can expect shorter delays.Looking forward to welcoming you this summer in Tunis!The Indaba is currently seeking sponsorship, so please alsoshare our prospectuswith your networks to help us secure the funds to support as many to attend as possible. If you’d like to join the organising committee to help make the Indaba happen, please get in touch. Any questions reach out to info – at- deeplearnnigindaba.comshare:Comments(0)Click here to cancel reply.
Join the 2022 Deep Learning Indaba [...]on Mar 18, 2022 12:39 PMThe Deep Learning Indaba will meet again in August 2022 in Tunisia. Strengthen African Mac[...]CategoriesArchivesContact usDeep Learning IndabaStrengthening African Machine Learninginfo@deeplearningindaba.comCopyright © Deep Learning Indaba 2017 - 2022. All Rights Reserved.
