old id = 1137
Careers
2022
https://deepmind.com/careers

Many disciplines, one common goalA community with a unique missionWe’re a dedicated scientific community, committed to “solving intelligence” and ensuring our technology is used for widespread public benefit.
Our pioneering and collaborative culture is made up of people from unusually diverse backgrounds. Together, we build computer systems that learn how to solve problems and advance scientific discovery for all.
Diverse perspectivesWe’re looking for people with a lifelongcommitment to learning, who are passionate about making a positive impact in the world. We’ve built a supportive and inclusive environment where collaboration is encouraged and learning is shared freely.
We don’t set limits based on what others think is possible or impossible. We drive ourselves and inspire each other to push boundaries and achieve ambitious goals.
We value our diversity of experience, knowledge, backgrounds, and perspectives and harness these qualities to discover connections, solve problems, and create extraordinary impact.
Our valuesMission DrivenWe're committed to solving intelligence, to advance science and benefit humanity.
It’s our mission, our shared purpose, our guide for everything we do and how we do it. We understand just how significant and important it is, and we put our passion and drive behind achieving it. Changes and challenges will come our way, but we embrace them and stay optimistic, knowing that it's a privilege to work on world-changing technology that can make an impact on the world around us.
PioneeringOur work is groundbreaking and inspiring, and our goals are incredibly ambitious.
We are striving to be the best in the world at what we do, pushing boundaries, driving ourselves and each other to create and innovate, always seeking to improve and reach our full potential. We don’t set limits based on what others think is possible or impossible; instead, we approach our work and the world with optimism and deep curiosity.
ResponsibleBringing this powerful technology into the world is a huge responsibility, and ethical considerations have to be at the forefront of all of our work.
While we act with speed and efficiency, we never compromise on our ethical standards. That means always thinking carefully about who this technology could impact; it means having integrity and doing what we say we will; it means owning and admitting our mistakes, learning from experience and feedback and being transparent with each other about what we do and why.
CollaborativeThe diversity of experience, knowledge, background and perspectives that we have makes us who we are.
We are an unusually interdisciplinary team, and our successes come from the unique opportunities that creates. We achieve much more through teamwork than we do alone, constructively challenging each other, seeking feedback, and asking for opinions.
We listen to different views to challenge our own assumptions, are quick to share credit, praise and recognise each other, and are flexible in the way we behave and work as a team.
KindOur unique culture belongs to all of us; we champion and protect it every day.
Our environment is built on respect - we are inclusive, fair, open-minded, and thoughtful with our opinions and their impact. Kindness, support, and encouragement fuel our growth and success, and we are positive and generous in spirit. We are loyal and protective, seeing the very best in each other and always ready to give the benefit of the doubt.
TeamsDiversity mattersWe know that:We’re always looking for great people and we're committed to ensuring that all applicants and employees will be treated fairly and with respect, irrespective of their background and identity.
We also partner with academia and non-profits on scholarships and other opportunities for people from underrepresented backgrounds.
LocationsInternshipsInterning at DeepMind offers a unique opportunity to collaborate with some of the world’s leading thinkers in artificial intelligence and its application for social good. We offer hands-on experience working collaboratively on projects that push the frontiers of AI and science.
Research Internswork closely with our research scientists on projects relating to ongoing topics and current goals within our research teams. Research internships are open to candidates studying towards a PhD in machine learning, computer science, computational neuroscience, or a related field. Internships with our Science team are also open to those studying a range of natural sciences, including physics, chemistry and biology.
OurEngineering Internshipsare open to current degree students at any level (bachelors, masters, doctorate) in a technical subject (computer science, engineering, maths, physics, etc), who have some practical software engineering experience. Machine learning experience is not required for engineering internships.
We also offer internships across a number of our teams, including Ethics & Society and Operations.
Note: Internships that start from May 2022 onwards will take place in our offices. Internships that start before May 2022 will take place remotely. Interns completing their internship remotely will still need to be based and have the right to work in a country in which DeepMind operates: the UK, the US, Canada and France. For both on-site and remote internships, DeepMind will provide immigration and relocation support if needed.
