old id = 1190
ABOUT ML Resources Library - Partnership on AI
2022
https://partnershiponai.org/about-ml-resources-library

ABOUT ML Resources LibraryOverviewABOUT ML(Annotation and Benchmarking on Understanding and Transparency of Machine learning Lifecycles) is a multi-year, multi-stakeholder initiative aimed at building transparency into the AI development process, industry-wide, through full lifecycle documentation. On this page, you will findthe collected outputs of ABOUT ML, a library of resources designed to help organizations and individuals begin implementing transparency at scale. To further increase the usability of these resources,recommended reading plans for different readers are provided below.
At the foundation of these resources lies the newly revisedABOUT ML Reference Document, which both identifies transparency goals and offers suggestions on how they might be achieved. Using principles provided by the Reference Document and insights about implementation gathered through our research, PAI plans to release additional ML documentation guides, templates, recommendations, and other artifacts. These future artifacts will also be available on this page.
Learn more about the origins of ABOUT ML and contributors to the projecthere.
ResourcesABOUT ML Reference DocumentProcess GuideGlossaryPromising Interventions‘How We Define’Quick GuidesRecommended Reading Plans for…ML System Developers/DeployersML system developers/deployersare encouraged to do a deep dive exploration ofSection 3: Preliminary Synthesized Documentation Suggestionsand use it to highlight gaps in their current understanding of both data- and model-related documentation and planning needs. This group will most benefit from further participation in the ABOUT ML effort by engaging with the community in the forthcoming online forum and by testing the efficacy and applicability of templates and specifications to be published in the PLAYBOOK and PILOTS, which will be developed based on use cases as an opportunity to implement ML documentation processes within an organization.
ML System ProcurersML system procurersmight exploreSection 2.2: Documentation to Operationalize AI Ethics Goalsto get ideas about what concepts to include as requirements for models and data in future requests for proposals relevant to ML systems. Additionally, they could useSection 2.3: Research Themes on Documentation for Transparencyto shape conversations with the business owners and requirements writers to further elicit detailed key performance indicators and measures for success for any procured ML systems.
Users of ML System APIs and/or Experienced End Users of ML SystemsUsers of ML system APIs and/or experienced end users of ML systemsmight skim the document and review all ofthe coral Quick Guidesto get a better understanding of how ML concepts are relevant to many of the tools they regularly use. A review ofSection 2.1: Demand for Transparency and AI Ethics in ML Systemswill provide insight into conditions where it is appropriate to use ML systems. This section also explains how transparency is a foundation for both internal accountability among the developers, deployers, and API users of an ML system and external accountability to customers, impacted non-users, civil society organizations, and policymakers.
Internal Compliance TeamsInternal compliance teamsare encouraged to exploreSection 4: Current Challenges of Implementing Documentationand use it to shape conversations with developer/deployment teams to find ways to measure compliance throughout the Machine Learning Lifecycle (MLLC).
External AuditorsExternal auditorscould skimAppendix: Compiled List of Documentation Questionsand familiarize themselves with high-level concepts as well as tactically operationalized tenets to look for in their determination of whether or not an ML System is well-documented.
Lay Users of ML Systems and/or Members of Low-Income CommunitiesLay users of ML systems and/or members of low-income communitiesmight skim the document and review all ofthe blue “How We Define” boxesin order to get an overarching understanding of the text’s contents. These users are encouraged to continue learning ABOUT ML systems by exploring how they might impact their everyday lives. Additional insights can be gathered fromthe Glossary sectionof the ABOUT ML Reference Document.
© 2022 Partnership on AI | All Rights Reserved
