old id = 1199
OII | Press Coverage
2022
https://www.oii.ox.ac.uk/news-events/coverage

Press CoverageElon Musk claims Twitter’s ban on Donald Trump amplified Trump’s voice among the right. That’s not quite true.
Business Insider, 15 May 2022Elon Musk wants to put Donald Trump back on Twitter. What are the implications if he does?‘Bleed Us Dry’: Why Tech Platforms Are Facing RebellionsInternational Business Times, 24 April 2022When Jak found online marketplace Etsy, it seemed like the perfect match: a tech platform for small traders to sell handmade items that promised to be a creative outlet and bring tidy profits.
Online labour: Can we all just move to Tahiti?The Sound of Economics, 23 March 2022The internet is changing the way we work. In this podcast, experts discuss the utilisation of online work across countries and occupations, what it means for the society, and how policymakers should better regulate it.
For Russian diplomats, disinformation is part of the jobThe Washington Post, 19 April 2022As governments and social media companies have moved to suppress Russia’s state media and the disinformation it spreads about the war in Ukraine, the Kremlin’s diplomats are stepping up to do the dirty work.
Global food prices; Cakeage; Social Internet TarrifsBBC Radio 4, 01 January 1970VOICE NOTES Seven billion WhatsApp voice notes are sent every day but are they an effective means of communication? Cristina Criddle, tech reporter for the FT and Bernie Hogan, senior research fellow at the Oxford Internet Institute, discuss.
AI researcher says police tech suppliers are hostile to transparencyComputer Weekly, 12 April 2022Expert witness in Lords police tech inquiry welcomes committee’s findings but questions whether its recommendations on how to end the ‘Wild West’ of police artificial intelligence and algorithmic technologies in the UK would be implemented.
It Took Us Less Than 24 Hours to Order an Endangered Tiger on FacebookVice, 07 April 2022Bears, pangolins, leopard cats: It’s shockingly easy to buy some of the most endangered species globally on the world's largest social media platform.
The UK’s Online Safety Bill: more revisions needed to ensure legislation tackles harms on the webGlobal Government Forum, 05 April 2022The UK’s Online Safety Bill aims to introduce law and order to the Digital Wild West and was recently introduced to the House of Commons. Anna George, a PhD student at the University of Oxford, reflects on the impact of the legislation.
Why social media and screen time can be bad for children, but rarely as bad as parents fearThe Independent online, 30 March 2022The link between screen time and mental health is not as clear as we think.
RT America, You Were Very Weird and BadThe Atlantic, 28 March 2022The Russia-funded news network staffed by American journalists shut down this month. What was it even trying to do?NatWest small business bank Mettle gains fivefold increase in customersFT, 28 March 2022Chief executive Andrew Ellis credits “passion economy” for surging demandThe age your child is most vulnerable to social media REVEALEDThe Daily Mail, 28 March 2022Major study reveals boys are most likely to be negatively affected between the ages of 14 and 15 – but girls are susceptible as young as 11.
1 St Giles, Oxford, OX1 3JS, UK+44 (0)1865 287210General:enquiries@oii.ox.ac.ukPress:press@oii.ox.ac.ukFOLLOW US:INFORMATION FOR:We are using cookies to give you the best experience on our website.
You can find out more about which cookies we are using or switch them off insettings.
This website uses cookies so that we can provide you with the best user experience possible. Cookie information is stored in your browser and performs functions such as recognising you when you return to our website and helping our team to understand which sections of the website you find most interesting and useful.
Strictly Necessary Cookie should be enabled at all times so that we can save your preferences for cookie settings.
If you disable this cookie, we will not be able to save your preferences. This means that every time you visit this website you will need to enable or disable cookies again.
This website uses the following additional cookies from third party websites:Please enable Strictly Necessary Cookies first so that we can save your preferences!This website uses Google Tags and Google Analytics to collect anonymised information such as the number of visitors to the site, and the most popular pages. Keeping these cookies enabled helps the OII improve our website.
Enabling this option will allow cookies from:Please enable Strictly Necessary Cookies first so that we can save your preferences!
