old id = 1210
OII | Digital Economies
2022
https://www.oii.ox.ac.uk/research/digital-economies

Digital EconomiesDigital EconomiesPageContentsEconomics plays a central role in policy, business, and competition regulation—not to mention debates on issues ranging from intellectual property to network neutrality. It’s important to understand how technology shapes economic life, and to study the economic and social implications of new market structures and business models.
Economic analysis can be used as a methodological toolset for rigorous thinking about important social issues, with strong positive and normative policy statements emerging naturally from this foundation.
ProjectsCreative work – A “hotspot” for digital skills? Identifying digital skill developments in the UK creative online freelance industryDigital technologies are transforming our work environments and demand for skills, with creative work severely affected. This project will use unique secondary data to measure changes in the UK’s creative service sector digital skill composition.
Fairwork for AIDrawing on the five OECD principles for responsible stewardship of trustworthy AI, this project proposes developing a set of accountability mechanisms to ensure AI systems foster fairer working conditions.
Fairwork United StatesThis project will examine how the growth of gig work in the United States can contribute to growing inequalities, and develop a framework for understanding best practice for fairer work standards.
iLabourNews from OII EconomistsThe latest opinion and comment from our researchers.
Book Launch! Digital Work in the Planetary Market17 May 2022We are pleased to announce the publication of Digital Work in the Planetary Market, a new book analysing the geographies of digital work.
Do Microcredentials Help New Workers Enter the Market?7 April 2022Dr Otto Kässi and Professor Vili Lehdonvirta’s new study examines how digital skill certificates are affecting the labour market and impacting jobseekers and employers.
Celebrating success: Key achievements and impacts of the iLabour project30 March 2022Professor Lehdonvirta takes stock of everything that he and his research team have learned through iLabour, a major research project that he launched in 2015 with funding from the European Research Council.
Press CoverageNatWest small business bank Mettle gains fivefold increase in customersFT, 28 March 2022Chief executive Andrew Ellis credits “passion economy” for surging demand99, Uber, iFood: survey gives low grade for working conditions offered by apps to ‘partners’g1, 17 March 2022Study evaluates the situation of app drivers, motorcycle couriers and service providers in five categories. On a scale of zero to 10, the highest score among technology companies was 2.
UBER, 99, RAPPI AND iFOOD have mealy grades in evaluatio of decent work in BrazilThe Intercept, 17 March 2022From 0 to 10, iFood and 99 get a score of 2, Uber, 1, and Rappi and Uber Eats, zero. Remuneration and working conditions are among the worst in the world.
Latest BooksFairworkAcademic spotlightProfessor Vili LehdonvirtaProfessor of Economic Sociology and Digital Social ResearchVili Lehdonvirta is Professor of Economic Sociology and Digital Social Research at the Oxford Internet Institute. He examines how digital technologies are shaping the organization of economic activities in society.
Many of the OII’s faculty work on digital economies, including Vili Lehdonvirta, who is Professor of Economic Sociology and Digital Social Research at the Oxford Internet Institute. Lehdonvirta is an economic sociologist whose research focuses on digital technologies, such as apps, platforms, and marketplaces — how they are governed, how they shape the organization of economic activities, and with what implications to workers, consumers, businesses, and policy. His research has been published in theJournal of Management,New Media & Society,Sociology, and other leading academic journals.
Lehdonvirta is the principal investigator ofiLabour, a major research project on online freelancing and the gig economy, funded by the European Research Council. He has also led research projects on online labour markets’ effects in rural areas and crowdworkers’ skill development. His other recent research takes a critical look at Bitcoin and blockchain. His previous research on virtual goods, virtual consumption and digital games is summarized inVirtual Economies: Design and Analysis, published by MIT Press and translated to Chinese by China Renmin University Press.
Lehdonvirta’s research draws on theories and approaches from economic sociology, new institutional economics, labour sociology, and science and technology studies. He and his students and postdoctoral researchers use a range of conventional social research methods as well as novel data science approaches. Lehdonvirta sits on the editorial boards of the journals Policy & Internet, The Information Society, Electronic Commerce Research and the Journal of International Business Policy.
ResearchersResearch into economics at the OII is carried out by faculty and students from diverse background. Some of our researchers were trained in economics, while others apply the lenses of other disciplines, like geography, sociology, and data science, to economic problems.
Professor Greg TaylorAssociate Professor, Senior Research Fellow, Director of Graduate StudiesGreg Taylor's research focuses on the economics of competition policy and regulation for digital and technology markets.
Professor Mark GrahamProfessor of Internet GeographyMark Graham is an economic geographer. His research focuses on digital labour, the gig economy, and digital inequalities. He is the author, most recently, of The Gig Economy: A Critical Introduction.
Dr Matthew ColePostdoctoral ResearcherMatthew Cole is a Postdoctoral Researcher at the Fairwork Foundation investigating global platforms. His research interests include the political economy of technology and platforms, particularly the transformation of work.
1 St Giles, Oxford, OX1 3JS, UK+44 (0)1865 287210General:enquiries@oii.ox.ac.ukPress:press@oii.ox.ac.ukFOLLOW US:INFORMATION FOR:We are using cookies to give you the best experience on our website.
You can find out more about which cookies we are using or switch them off insettings.
This website uses cookies so that we can provide you with the best user experience possible. Cookie information is stored in your browser and performs functions such as recognising you when you return to our website and helping our team to understand which sections of the website you find most interesting and useful.
Strictly Necessary Cookie should be enabled at all times so that we can save your preferences for cookie settings.
If you disable this cookie, we will not be able to save your preferences. This means that every time you visit this website you will need to enable or disable cookies again.
This website uses the following additional cookies from third party websites:Please enable Strictly Necessary Cookies first so that we can save your preferences!This website uses Google Tags and Google Analytics to collect anonymised information such as the number of visitors to the site, and the most popular pages. Keeping these cookies enabled helps the OII improve our website.
Enabling this option will allow cookies from:Please enable Strictly Necessary Cookies first so that we can save your preferences!
