old id = 1211
OII | Digital Politics and Government
2022
https://www.oii.ox.ac.uk/research/digital-politics-and-government

Digital Politics and GovernmentDigital Politics and GovernmentPageContentsThe Internet has transformed political behaviour, from voting and campaigning for policy change, to protest and even revolution. This poses a challenge to states, as political movements become more turbulent, unpredictable, and societies harder to govern.
To understand this radically transformed political world, we are re-examining the models and conceptual frameworks of political science and theory, and developing social data science methodologies to understand political behaviour.
ProjectsProgramme on Democracy and TechnologyDemTech investigates the use of algorithms, automation, and computational propaganda in public life.
Political VolatilityThis project seeks to quantify trends and changes in the volatility of public opinion before and after widespread use of social media, and to study how social information can drive public opinion.
What Do ‘the People’ Want? Analysing Online Populist Challenges to EuropeDigital media allows populist messages to gain circulation, bypassing mainstream channels. This project aims to understand the extent of the impact such messages have among the general public.
Programme on Democracy & TechnologyNewsOII welcomes publication of REF 2021 results12 May 2022The UK funding bodies have published the results of the UK’s most recent national research assessment exercise, the Research Excellence Framework (REF) 2021.
Celebrating International Women’s Day at the OII8 March 2022The theme of International Women’s Day 2022 is #BreakTheBias. We're marking the day by highlighting the work of our brilliant and innovative women academics, researchers, and students, here at the OII.
Big challenges and big data – Making climate-induced migration visible with machine learning.
7 March 2022Climate change and global migration are at the centre of policymakers' efforts. Together with World Bank colleagues, we showcase how social data science can help policy to make more informed decisions on some of the largest challenges of our times.
Press CoverageFor Russian diplomats, disinformation is part of the jobThe Washington Post, 19 April 2022As governments and social media companies have moved to suppress Russia’s state media and the disinformation it spreads about the war in Ukraine, the Kremlin’s diplomats are stepping up to do the dirty work.
RT America, You Were Very Weird and BadThe Atlantic, 28 March 2022The Russia-funded news network staffed by American journalists shut down this month. What was it even trying to do?Apple has cut business ties with Russia, but its App Store still hosts 45 apps by Yandex, the Russian internet giant that’s been accused of censorship about UkraineBusiness Insider, 23 March 2022Apple has cut business ties with Russia, but its App Store still hosts 45 apps by Yandex, the Russian internet giant that's been accused of censorship about Ukraine.
Latest Books and ReportsOxCAIGGAcademic SpotlightProfessor Helen MargettsProfessor of Society and the InternetHelen Margetts is Professor of Society and the Internet, a political scientist specialising in digital government and politics. She was Director of the OII from 2011-18. She is a Professorial Fellow of Mansfield College.
The OII is home to some of the top academics studying digital politics and government, including Professor Helen Margetts. She is a political scientist specialising in the relationship between digital technology and government, politics and public policy. She is an advocate for the potential of multi-disciplinarity and computational social science for our understanding of political behaviour and development of public policy in a digital world.
She has published over a hundred books, articles and policy reports in this area, includingPolitical Turbulence: How Social Media Shape Collective Action(with Peter John, Scott Hale and Taha Yasseri, 2015);Paradoxes of Modernization(with Perri 6 and Christopher Hood, 2010);Digital Era Governance(with Patrick Dunleavy, 2006, 2008); andThe Tools of Government in the Digital Age(with Christopher Hood, 2007).
Professor Margetts joined the OII in 2004 from University College London where she was a Professor in Political Science and Director of the School of Public Policy. She began her career as a computer programmer and systems analyst with Rank Xerox after receiving her BSc in mathematics from the University of Bristol. She returned to study at the London School of Economics and Political Science in 1989, completing an MSc in Politics and Public Policy in 1990 and a PhD in Government in 1996. She worked as a researcher at LSE from 1991 to 1994 and a lecturer at Birkbeck College, University of London from 1994 to 1999.
PeopleDr Jonathan BrightResearch AssociateIn 2022 Jonathan Bright became the Head of AI for Public Services at the Turing Institute, having previously been a faculty member of the OII. A political scientist, he specialises in computational and ‘big data’ approaches to the social sciences.
Dr Scott A. HaleAssociate Professor, Senior Research FellowDr Scott A. Hale is an Associate Professor, Senior Research Fellow, and Turing Fellow. He develops and applies computer science techniques to the social sciences focusing on improving equitable access to quality information.
Professor Philip HowardProfessor of Internet StudiesPhilip N. Howard is a professor of sociology, information and international affairs, and the author of Lie Machines: How to Save Democracy from Troll Armies, Deceitful Robots, Junk News Operations, and Political Operatives.
1 St Giles, Oxford, OX1 3JS, UK+44 (0)1865 287210General:enquiries@oii.ox.ac.ukPress:press@oii.ox.ac.ukFOLLOW US:INFORMATION FOR:We are using cookies to give you the best experience on our website.
You can find out more about which cookies we are using or switch them off insettings.
This website uses cookies so that we can provide you with the best user experience possible. Cookie information is stored in your browser and performs functions such as recognising you when you return to our website and helping our team to understand which sections of the website you find most interesting and useful.
Strictly Necessary Cookie should be enabled at all times so that we can save your preferences for cookie settings.
If you disable this cookie, we will not be able to save your preferences. This means that every time you visit this website you will need to enable or disable cookies again.
This website uses the following additional cookies from third party websites:Please enable Strictly Necessary Cookies first so that we can save your preferences!This website uses Google Tags and Google Analytics to collect anonymised information such as the number of visitors to the site, and the most popular pages. Keeping these cookies enabled helps the OII improve our website.
Enabling this option will allow cookies from:Please enable Strictly Necessary Cookies first so that we can save your preferences!
