old id = 1238

2022
https://www.iter.org/album/construction

Subscribe optionsSelect your newsletters:ITER NewslineKeep in touch with ITER through our main news feed, sent weekly.
ITER Magazine - French onlyLearn more about the ITER Project by subscribing to this quarterly online magazine that is geared toward the general public.
ITER Open Doors Day - NotificationsStay informed about the ITER Open Doors sessions and be among the first to subscribe to the next event.
Please enter your email address:Your email address will only be used for the purpose of sending you the ITER Organization publication(s) that you have requested.
ITER Organization will not transfer your email address or other personal data to any other party or use it for commercial purposes.
If you change your mind, you can easily unsubscribeby clicking the unsubscribe option at the bottom of an email you've received from ITER Organization.
For more information, see ourPrivacy policy.
AboutMachineScienceConstructionAssemblyNews & MediaTopPhotosITER achieves major liftOn 11 May 2022, the ITER Organization team achieves a major assembly milestone: lifting the first sub-section of the ITER plasma chamber out of tooling and lowering it into the machine well.
11 May 2022Months of practice and preparationFrom one of the "command centres," looking through a port cell window out into the Tokamak pit, where the first section of the ITER plasma chamber is slowly descending toward waiting supports. The DYNAMIC consortium (Ansaldo Nucleare; Endel Engie; Orys Group ORTEC; SIMIC; Ansaldo Energia; and Leading Metal Mechanic Solutions SL) is ITER's TAC2 assembly contractor (for Tokamak Assembly Contractor 2), in charge of sector sub-assembly, and assembly of the main vessel and ports including welding.
11 May 2022Most complex lift to dateThe 1,380-tonne assembly (component plus rigging) is six storeys high and weighs the equivalent of four fully loaded Boeing 747s. The lift operation achieved today was the most complex of ITER machine assembly to date.
11 May 2022Over the wall, with only 20 cm to spareThe massive component—representing one-ninth of the ITER plasma chamber—was extracted from its assembly tool, rotated, transferred over the bioshield wall (with only 20 cm to spare), and lowered into the Tokamak pit.
11 May 2022The first of nine similar "sub-assemblies"The "piece" of the ITER machine installed today is a modular assembly, formed from one 40° vacuum vessel sector fitted with silver-coated thermal shields, and two D-shaped vertical superconducting electromagnets called toroidal field coils. Eight other similar assemblies will form the complete chamber and surrounding toroidal field coil superstructure.
11 May 2022There they areOn 5 May, in a pre-lift test, the sector module is lifted 50 centimetres above its supports. This small distance is visible below the rectangular structure illuminated by the green pointer's beam at the centre of the image.
05 May 2022WowEach of the bridge crane's four hooks can be seen to support loads of approximately 345 tonnes (two totals are visible in this image). The total weight of the sector module plus its rigging apparatus is in the range of 1,380 tonnes—the equivalent of four fully loaded Boeing 747s.
05 May 2022Future control roomLooking southwest, with the Tokamak Complex in the background, this is the 43 m x 18 m main control room. Its steel structure is in place and roof cladding will soon be installed. The room will have a raised floor 70 centimetres above the present slab to accommodate the dense cabling that will transport power and data to the various control desks.
05 May 2022Control centre risingWork is progressing on the 3,500-square metre, three-storey ITER Control Building. Scientists, engineers and operators will work from here to monitor machine operation and analyze the data they receive from each pulse.
05 May 2022Future server roomSmaller than the main control room, the main server room (30 m x 13 m) will also have a raised floor to house the cabling carrying large amounts of data to and from the numerous CODAC cubicles. Concrete works have been finalized in this area and waterproofing is ongoing on the roof slab in order to commence interior finishing work.
05 May 2022Meeting room with a viewOn southeastern side of the building, a meeting room with large glazed openings will provide an unobstructed view of the Tokamak Complex and the heat rejection area—a nice change from the numbers and graphs on the operators' computer screens.
05 May 2022Pre-lift: a successThe pre-lift operation on Thursday 5 May was a partial rehearsal for the big lift to come, testing the tools, sequences, and coordination. For the ITER Organization and DYNAMIC teams that participated, it was a success.
05 May 2022Only 50 cm, but ...
Lifting the 1,380-tonne load (module + rigging) a mere 50 centimetres required the participation of dozens of specialists from the ITER Organization and the DYNAMIC SNC consortium (in charge of the TAC2 machine assembly contract covering the main vessel and ports, sector sub-assembly with toroidal field coils and vacuum vessel thermal shielding, and welding: more information at https://www.iter.org/construction/TokamakAssembly).
05 May 2022Watching the instrumentsAlthough it represented only a fraction of what the actual operation will require, the "pre-lifting" of the sector assembly on Thursday 5 May permitted the thorough testing of every instrument that will be involved in the major move to come.
05 May 2022WorkhorsesThe strong hands of the ITER bridge cranes ...
03 May 2022The golden hourEvening is upon us and the teams working to prepare sector module #6 for transfer have turned on some extra lighting ...
02 May 2022Commissioning the liquid nitrogen (LN2) plantAs part of LN2 plant commissioning, this liquid nitrogen tank is being filled to 80% of its capacity to verify the rate of evaporation, which should not exceed 0.16 percent of the total volume per day. The tank in the photo has a capacity of 300 cubic metres.
29 April 2022A second sub-assembly underwayToroidal field coil #9 (TF9) from Europe has been mounted on one of the standing tools. Through the rotary motion of the wing, the coil will be brought toward the vacuum vessel sector at the centre and attached.
29 April 2022Sector assembly lineThermal shield panels have been pivoted to the vacuum vessel sector in the foreground and attached. A toroidal field coil from Europe is already held vertically in tooling, ready to be transferred across and installed on one of the tool's wings.
25 April 2022A, B then CThe purpose-built central solenoid module lift tool (bottom left) is ready to exert a radial force on the first 110-tonne magnet module (top left) in order to lift it to the central solenoid assembly platform (top right). This operation is planned before the end of April 2022.
25 April 2022"The beam" is in placeA new scaffolding element called "the beam" has been installed above the Tokamak pit (to the right). This 28-metre-long structure will allow for the installation of the cable trays and ventilation ducts. More on the challenge of scaffolding at ITER here: https://www.iter.org/newsline/-/3745.
25 April 2022BustlingThe busy ITER Assembly Hall. Only 97 metres long and 60 metres wide ... and a lot of pre-assembly activities to house.
25 April 2022Neutral beam heating power supply: buildings risingFrom the roof of the Diagnostics Building, we are looking directly down at the site of the future ITER Neutral Beam Power Supply buildings, currently under construction by European Domestic Agency (Fusion for Energy) contractors.
25 April 2022Roads finalizedThis paved road running to the east of the Tokamak Complex is one of the last to be realized under Fusion for Energy's TB16 contract, which covered the realization of service trenches, precipitation drainage, and site adaptation works such as roads and lighting.
25 April 2022Toroidal field coil #9 goes verticalIn the ITER Assembly Hall, the overhead bridge cranes are used to raise a 330-tonne toroidal field coil, tightly lashed inside the upending frame, to vertical. The coil will be moved across the Hall to join vacuum vessel sector #1(7).
25 April 2022At the centre of it allTwo workers stand in the central Tokamak pit, a 30-metre-tall x 30-metre-wide space where the assembly of the ITER machine is proceeding from bottom up.
22 April 2022Poloidal field coil #4 in fabricationEight double pancakes have been stacked and joined and now poloidal field coil #4 (PF4) is being prepared for vacuum pressure impregnation, which confers electrical insulation to the magnet and creates a rigid assembly.
14 April 2022All it takesA vacuum vessel sector, two toroidal field coils, thermal shield segments... that's all it takes to assemble a 1,250-tonne "sector module." In the Assembly Hall, barely visible in the background, sector module #6 is ready to be installed in the Tokamak pit; in the foreground, sector module #1(7) has entered the pre-assembly process.
08 April 2022Sector #8 uncoveredSector #8, recently delivered by the Korean Domestic Agency, has been removed from its transport housing and placed on temporary supports.
08 April 2022From the upper galleriesAt 55 metres above the floor, the gangway offers a spectacular view of the Assembly Hall's ever-changing landscape. In this 6,000-square-metre building, components are unloaded, received, equipped, and handled prior to being lifted into the Tokamak assembly pit.
08 April 2022Central solenoid "corner"Delivered in September 2021, the first of the six modules required for the central solenoid magnet sits between the lifting fixture (holding an orange mockup) and the assembly platform (grey). The six modules will be stacked one atop the other in order to form the 18-metre tall, 1,000-tonne magnet.
08 April 2022Third time aroundLike sectors #6 and #1(7), this vacuum vessel sector (#8) will be first be inspected, then equipped with fasteners, instrumentation and diagnostics before moving on to a vertical position in sub-assembly tooling. With repetition, these operations are carried out with ever more efficiency.
07 April 2022Start of shiftIt is a bit after 1:00 p.m. in the vast ITER Cleaning Facility and second-shift workers from the CNPE consortium are assembled for their daily briefing. As they stand to attention, a foreman in a green helmet, bullhorn in hand, communicates the objectives of the day, describes the co-activity they will encounter, and emphasizes the importance of strictly observing safety rules. The CNPE consortium is one of two ITER machine assembly contractors (more at: https://www.iter.org/construction/TokamakAssembly).
01 April 2022Sector #8 enters the stageVacuum vessel sector #8, recently arrived from Korea, is the third sector to enter the ITER assembly buildings (pictured: the Cleaning Facility). The project is expecting six more sectors (one from Korea and five from Europe).
01 April 2022Before the double doors openBefore the double doors into the Assembly Hall open to admit vacuum vessel sector #8, from Korea, the transport container is cleaned with high-power washers.
01 April 2022Diagnostics: installing captive components nowSupport elements for diagnostic pipes, cables and lines are received at the workshop of the installation contractor on the ITER site, before they are assembled and installed in the Tokamak Complex. Any captive components (soon to be boxed in by other systems or components) must be installed now.
31 March 2022Early installation for optical diagnosticsRecently installed diagnostics supports at the L1 level of the Tokamak Building, showing some of the detail of how the supports are bolted to the ceiling by first welding threaded studs to steel plates embedded in the ceiling concrete. This allows for high accuracy in the installation of the optical beamlines.
31 March 2022"Hugging" the ceilingSupports installed on the ceiling in the B1 level of the Tokamak Building, showing the ''ceiling hugging'' nature, which keeps the diagnostic systems very close to the ceiling and above other installed equipment.
31 March 2022"Final closing piece"ITER Head of Construction Youngeek Jung speaks at a ceremony on 24 March 2022 in the Cryostat Workshop. Speaking of the completed cryostat lid, which has been prepared for storage, he said, "When it next appears, it will be the final closing piece of the largest fusion machine humans have ever dared to build."24 March 2022In person and through video link...
Gathered in the Cryostat Workshop on site or present virtually through a video connection with India, the designers, manufacturers, machining experts, metrology specialists and welders involved in the realization of the ITER cryostat bore testimony to the magnitude and complexity of the international venture.
24 March 2022Site Services Building: beginning to serve clientsThe Site Services Building is beginning to service its first utility clients on the ITER platform. Densely packed with a demineralized water plant, chiller systems, air compressors, dozens of pumps and kilometres of piping, the facility produces and distributes compressed and breathable air (for operators in ventilated nuclear suits), demineralized water for cooling circuits and detritiation systems, and cold water for air conditioning systems.
18 March 2022Compressed air for cryoplant commissioning firstConnecting the compressed air distribution network to the cryoplant was an essential step in the testing of the facility's 1,500 pneumatic actuators and hundreds of control valves. An integrated team composed of ITER operators and European staff from Fusion for Energy and Engage have been working closely together to achieve this milestone. The demineralized water system will be next, and progressively, one by one, all the clients throughout the installation on the platform will be served.
18 March 2022A gripping tool for central solenoid assemblyThis unique tool was designed by US ITER to clutch 110-tonne central solenoid modules and hold them in its grip by exerting a strong radial force. The modules cannot be lifted in a traditional manner because it is impossible to add hooks and other lift fixtures to the superconductors.
17 March 2022Central columnInside of the Tokamak pit, where the central column tool is ready to receive the first 1,200-tonne section of the vacuum vessel. The beam connected to the top of the section will brace between the central column and the surrounding wall.
15 March 2022Taking care of scaffoldingA dedicated team on site takes care of the assembly and disassembly of all scaffolding. For scaffolding operations in the Tokamak pit, such as this assembly around the central column of the in-pit column tool, a carbon-free kit is necessary. The team now has almost 100 tonnes of carbon-free material on hand after developing and procuring it especially for ITER's needs.
15 March 2022Demand for scaffolding is increasingAs construction and assembly accelerate at ITER, the demand for scaffolding is increasing. There are currently about 800 scaffolds in use on the site and every month there are more than 300 new scaffolding jobs that need to be done, without considering the modification and dismantling tasks.
15 March 2022"The beam"This 28-metre-long scaffolding structure known as ''the beam'' will be installed above the Tokamak pit to allow for the completion of cable trays and ventilation ducts.
15 March 2022Scaffolding: always changingScaffolding. Imagine you have a massive Lego kit with 1,600 different types of references and you need to build hundreds of one-of-a-kind structures while facing challenging deadlines ...
15 March 2022Custom designed for the SSAT1 toolThis scaffolding was specifically designed to give contractors access to all parts of the sector sub-assembly tool SSAT1 in the Assembly Hall. The ITER construction team works with Construction Management-as-Agent contractor MOMENTUM and scaffolding contractor Entrepose Echafaudages to design and build these specialized projects.
15 March 2022Thanks to ...
The steel elements were manufactured by Larsen & Toubro (India) for the Indian Domestic Agency. Welding and assembly were carried out in the Cryostat Workshop by MAN Energy Solutions (Germany). The 665-tonne component will be stored outdoors from October 2022 on in order to make room in this workshop for other machine assembly activities.
10 March 2022Lid completedApproximately one year after work started on the ITER cryostat top lid, the team has completed the 665-tonne component. Only some cleaning and final verification checks remain.
10 March 2022The most complex of the sectionsThe top lid is also the most structurally complex of the four sections that make up the ITER cryostat. Curved in three directions like a skull cap, it is strengthened by an array of stiffeners and ribs. Here, from left to right: Dipen Shah, from Indian manufacturer Larsen & Toubro; Guillaume Vitupier, leader of the ITER cryostat group; and Girish Kumar Gupta, ITER cryostat engineer.
10 March 2022From the topIn March, the commissioning team transfers water from the hot basin to two cells of the cooling tower for the first time, using vertical turbine pump #13. In the picture, we can see the water in the towers by spray nozzles to the fill packs (which increase the heat exchange surface).
09 March 2022Six years of activity come to a closeFinal checks before the component is handed over to the ITER Organization late March. The finalization of the top lid concludes six years of work in the Cryostat Workshop for the assembly and welding of the four large ITER cryostat sections.
08 March 2022300 specialized jointsApproximately 300 superconducting feeder joints need to be created as part of assembling the magnet feeders on site at ITER. These highly critical joints require special qualification and training to carry out. See more at https://www.iter.org/newsline/-/3726.
01 March 2022In one corner of the Assembly HallThis is the first ITER central solenoid module to enter the assembly process. As the yellow lifting tools and devices are progressively removed from the module on the left, the platform to the right is being equipped for the first assembly steps.
28 February 2022Control Building, part twoWork has started on the steel structure of the ITER Control Building.
21 February 2022Coming out of the ground: Neutral Beam Power Supply buildingsNot often seen from above: the neutral beam power supply buildings, which are under construction next to the Tokamak Complex. Work on the foundations is advancing well.
21 February 2022Another bottom coilA small superconducting magnet, a bottom correction coil, is inserted into the space at the bottom of the Tokamak pit between ring coil PF6 (hidden under staging at left) and PF5 (right).
15 February 2022A simple tableEquipment and tests will be performed on this simple ''table'' before the module is moved over to the assembly platform, visible on the right side of the image.
10 February 2022Powerful ductsAgainst the backdrop of the travelling module are ducts belonging to the Assembly Hall's powerful HVAC system. The Assembly Building will be operated as a clean space for the duration of machine assembly.
10 February 2022TravellingOnce six modules are stacked and assembled, the ITER central solenoid will be placed at the very centre of the Tokamak pit where the central column (a temporary assembly tool) presently stands.
10 February 2022First central solenoid module aloftA 110-tonne central solenoid module is moved to the far end of the Assembly Hall for tests on its instrumentation, sensors and superconducting joints.
10 February 2022Careful preparationThe team spent more than one hour preparing the load for the lift. It was essential to avoid any contact between the rigging and the electrical connections on the central solenoid module.
10 February 2022Sector alleyAgainst the backdrop of vacuum vessel sector assembly, CNPE* consortium members are preparing to move a 100-tonne central solenoid module. (China Nuclear Power Engineering = China Nuclear Industry 23 Construction Company Ltd.; Southwestern Institute of Physics; Institute of Plasma Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences ASIPP; and Framatome). More on assembly contractors here: https://www.iter.org/construction/TokamakAssembly10 February 2022Careful adjustmentThe workers in the cherry picker will adjust strap lengths, millimetre by millimetre, so that the 110-tonne central solenoid module will be perfectly balanced and the lift perfectly vertical.
10 February 2022Tasks in the Assembly HallThe two main machine assembly contractors (CNPE and DYNAMIC) have learned to share tooling and common services in an efficient manner as they execute work packages under the oversight of ITER Organization and MOMENTUM (Construction Management-as-Agent) teams.
10 February 2022Commissioning the heat rejection systemCommissioning of the heat rejection system is well underway, clearing the path for all "client" systems. The team started by performing loop checks, testing of input/output signals, starting up motors and pumps, and circulating water through the basins.
04 February 2022Implementing every step of the processAnother commissioning task is testing the control software for the heat rejection system. Laura de Frutos Bolzoni (centre) is the engineer responsible for integrating the cooling water system with CODAC (ITER's central control system). Thomas Pralus (left) and Thierry Menguy (right) also work in the Operations Division with responsibility for cooling water commissioning.
04 February 2022Step-by-step commissioningOne big remaining task for the team is testing the 10 cooling towers. A lot of cold commissioning has already been done there, including all the instrumentation of the cooling tower fans; the next step is to start the fans.
04 February 2022Calling downWork is underway on the second vacuum vessel sub-assembly, with technicians at every level.
03 February 2022Keeping track of all partsThis small part, an elbow joint, must be manufactured, inspected, transported, received in an ITER warehouse, inspected again, logged into the system and finally stored before the time comes for it to be integrated into the ITER machine. ITER's Integrated Material & Logistics Management Group is currently managing the storage of 1.5 million parts and components. (See more at: https://www.iter.org/newsline/-/3725)03 February 2022ITER's largest warehouseThe main ITER warehouse on site, where components are stored according to specific requirements such as temperature and humidity control. On average, four or five shipments arrive at the main warehouse each day.
03 February 2022Joining conductor "terminations"Conductor lengths have to be joined at their ends. In this photo, the European teams are preparing a termination "joggle" by bending the conductor to align with another conductor end.
20 January 2022Final double pancakes for PF3This is a double pancake for poloidal field coil #3, the last one of four to be manufactured in this on-site European winding facility. It is 24 metres in diameter.
20 January 2022Manual wrapping, nine layersPrior to final resin impregnation, coils are manually wrapped with nine successive layers of glass-Kapton tape that provide efficient electrical insulation. (In the photo is coil PF4.)20 January 2022Spool after spoolFifty-six spools, each weighing 16 tonnes and containing 900 metres of jacketed superconducting cable, have already been used in the onsite manufacturing of the ITER poloidal field coils.
20 January 2022Working on a 2nd sub-assemblyThe teams are working on the second vacuum vessel sub-assembly. In this tool we see sector #1(which will be placed next to sector #6 in the pit in position 7) and an outboard thermal shield panel on the left. The thermal shield will be rotated toward the vacuum vessel sector and attached in place.
19 January 2022Working at heightScaffolding surrounds the docked sector to give access to every level of the giant component. Still, a bucket truck can be useful ...
19 January 2022Pieces all alignedLike Erector set or Meccano parts, components and tools for ITER machine assembly cover the floor of the vast hall that serves as an antechamber to the Tokamak pit.
17 January 2022Adjusting a correction coilWorkers from the CNPE Consortium are seen here carrying out metrology measurements at the bottom of the Tokamak pit, adjusting a kidney-shaped bottom correction coil on its yellow temporary supports. Final positioning will be possible only when all vacuum vessel modules are in place.
05 January 2022Second sector assembly underwayA second 440-tonne vacuum vessel sector, #1(7), is positioned vertically in the tooling for sub-assembly with other major components (a pair of vertical coils and thermal shield panels). Far to the right, the first completed sub-assembly (around sector #6) waits for transfer this month into the Tokamak pit.
03 January 20222 sectors of 9One sub-assembly is ready (far end), another is in the early stages. A third vacuum vessel sector sub-assembly will be built around Korean sector #8, which will leave Hyundai Heavy Industries later this month. Nine sectors in all will form the ITER machine torus (4 from Korea and 5 from Europe).
03 January 2022FocusedA metrology instrument has been fixed to a port cell (right), with its camera trained on the centre of the assembly pit. During the assembly phase and beyond, metrology processes ensure that the machine and its supporting systems are dimensionally compliant.
03 January 2022New laboratory building on siteThis 700 m² facility will be equipped for vacuum and tritium laboratory activities, including the assembly and testing of delivered components, performance trials, welding and grinding and maintenance. It was erected in just one year.
03 January 2022Click on a picture to see it fullscreen202220212020201920182017201620152014201320122011201020092008200720062005' + title + '' + text + '' + date + 'See our other image galleriesFOR THE PUBLICFOR THE PRESSFOR SCIENTISTSFOR INDUSTRYINTRANETITER Assembly Live Event - 28 JULYThe event will be live-streamed, in three parts (all times listed are French local times):10:00 a.m. — Tour of the ITER worksite and large components on site11:00 a.m. — Ceremony, including statements by world leaders12:30 a.m. (or following the ceremony) — Press conference
