old id = 232
Scientists Use AI to Trace the Origins of Psychedelic Experiences in the Brain
2022
https://singularityhub.com/2022/03/20/scientists-use-ai-to-trace-the-origins-of-psychedelic-experiences-in-the-brain

Scientists Use AI to Trace the Origins of Psychedelic Experiences in the BrainFor the past several decades, psychedelics have been widely stigmatized as dangerous illegal drugs. But a recentsurge of academic researchinto their use to treat psychiatric conditions isspurring a shift in public opinion.
Psychedelics arepsychotropic drugs: substances that affect your mental state. Other types of psychotropics include antidepressants and anti-anxiety medications. Psychedelics and other types of hallucinogens, however, are unique in theirability to temporarily induceintense hallucinations, emotions, and disruptions of self-awareness.
Researchers looking into the therapeutic potential of these effects have found that psychedelics can dramatically reduce symptoms ofdepression and anxiety,PTSD,substance abuse, andother psychiatric conditions. The intense experiences, or “trips,” that psychedelics induce are thought to create a temporary window ofcognitive flexibilitythat allows patients to gain access to elusive parts of their psyches and forge better coping skills and thought patterns.
Precisely how psychedelics create these effects, however, is still unclear. So as researchers inpsychiatryandmachine learning, we were interested in figuring out how these drugs affect the brain. With artificial intelligence, we were able tomap people’s subjective experiences while using psychedelicsto specific regions of the brain, down to the molecular level.
Mapping ‘Trips’ in the BrainEvery psychedelic functions differently in the body, and each of the subjective experiences these drugs create have different therapeutic effects.
Mystical type experiences, or feelings of unity and oneness with the world, for example, are associated with decreases in depression and anxiety. Knowing how each psychedelic creates these specific effects in the body can help cliniciansoptimize their therapeutic use.
To better understand how these subjective effects manifest in the brain, we analyzed over 6,000 written testimonials of hallucinogenic experiences fromErowid Center, an organization that collects and provides information about psychoactive substances. We transformed these testimonials into what’s called abag-of-words model, which breaks down a given text into individual words and counts how many times each word appears. We then paired the most commonly used words linked to each psychedelic with receptors in the brain that are known to bind to each drug. After usingan algorithmto extract the most common subjective experiences associated with these word-receptor pairs, we mapped these experiences onto different brain regions by matching them to the types of receptors present in each area.
We found both new links and patterns that confirm what’s known in the research literature. For example, changes in sensory perception were associated with aserotonin receptorin the visual cortex of the brain, which binds to amoleculethat helps regulate mood and memory. Feelings of transcendence were connected to dopamine and opioid receptors in thesalience network, a collection of brain regions involved in managing sensory and emotional input. Auditory hallucinations were linked to a number of receptors spread throughout theauditory cortex.
Our findings also align with theleading hypothesisthat psychedelics temporarily reducetop-down executive function, or cognitive processes involved in inhibition, attention and memory, among others, while amplifying brain regions involved in sensory experience.
Why It MattersThe US is going through a profoundmental health crisisthat has been exacerbated by the Covid-19 pandemic. Yet there have been no truly new psychiatric drug treatments since Prozac and other selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, the most common type of antidepressants, of the1980s.
Our study shows that it’s possible to map the diverse and wildly subjective psychedelic experiences to specific regions in the brain. These insights may lead tonew waysto combine existing or yet to be discovered compounds to produce desired treatment effects for a range of psychiatric conditions.
PsychiatristStanislav Groffamously proposed, “[P]sychedelics, used responsibly and with proper caution, would be for psychiatry what the microscope is to the study of biology and medicine or the telescope for astronomy.” As psychedelics and other hallucinogens become more commonly used clinically and culturally, we believe more research willfurther illuminate the biological basisof the experiences they invoke and help realize their potential.
This article is republished fromThe Conversationunder a Creative Commons license. Read theoriginal article.
Image Credit:Marco Xu/UnsplashFollow Galen:LatestThis Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through May 21)Volvo and DHL Are Partnering on Hub-to-Hub Autonomous TruckingHow a Volcanic Bombardment in Ancient Australia Led to the World’s Greatest Climate CatastropheRELATEDA One-and-Done CRISPR Gene Therapy Will Aim to Prevent Heart AttacksA Virus Just Wiped Out Antibiotic-Resistant Infection in an Immunocompromised PatientNanomagnetic Computing Could Drastically Cut AI’s Energy UseHow the Extinction of Ice Age Mammals May Have Forced Us to Invent CivilizationGet the latest news from Singularity Hub!Singularity University, Singularity Hub, Singularity Summit, SU Labs, Singularity Labs, Exponential Medicine, Exponential Finance and all associated logos and design elements are trademarks and/or service marks of Singularity Education Group.
© 2022 Singularity Education Group. All Rights Reserved.
Singularity University is not a degree granting institution.
