old id = 1700
PhD in Data Science – NYU Center for Data Science
2022
https://cds.nyu.edu/phd-faqs

NYU Center for Data ScienceHarnessing Data’s Potential for the WorldPhD in Data ScienceAn NRT-sponsored program in Data ScienceFAQFAQAdmissionsMay I apply for more than one graduate degree at NYU?That depends on how your multiple applications are split up over the NYU schools. You can apply concurrently to as many NYU schools as you wish. Some schools allow you to apply to multiple programs. However, the PhD in Data Science is part of the Graduate School of Arts and Science, which permits only one application at a time. Please note that you can find the full Graduate School of Arts and Science policy onthe NYU GSAS General Application Policies page.
Can I apply to both MSDS and PhD?No, both programs are housed within the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, which permits only one application at a time.
Can I move into the PhD automatically after completing MSDS?No, you will need to apply to the PhD program.
May I take courses without applying for a degree?Yes, we do admit non-degree students. For more information on the application process, please see theGSAS Instructions For the Non-Degree and Visiting Student Application for Admission page. There is a limit on the number of such courses you can take as a non-degree student.
I’m currently a student at NYU. How can I apply for the PhD in Data Science?Students enrolled in any other NYU graduate program must submit a new application. NYU students enrolled in a Courant graduate degree must also submit a new application. Students in a Courant graduate program cannot apply for a transfer.
What are the admission requirements?See ourPhD Admission Requirements pagefor the prerequisite information.
Are international students accepted?NYU seeks talented students from every corner of the globe.
Are there different requirements for international students?For more information for international students interested in the PhD in Data Science program, please visitthe NYU Graduate School of Arts and Science website.
Can the test scores be received after the application deadline?Due to the extraordinary circumstances of COVID 19 we are allowing for official test scores to be received after the application due date for the Fall 2022 application cycle. Please note that you will be required to upload a copy of your unofficial scores no later than the announceddeadlines.
If I am denied admission, can I apply again?Yes, you may apply again by submitting a new application and supplemental material.
I am rejected, can I get a feedback?Unfortunately, due to a high volume of applications, reviewers cannot provide feedback on why an application was rejected.
Can Data Science students pursue a dual degree?No, unfortunately, there are no dual data science degrees at this time. However, the data science curriculum allows students to take electives within various departments outside of Data Science.
ApplicationsWhere do I mail official transcripts?Copies of your official transcripts should be uploaded with your application. If you are accepted, the Graduate School of Arts & Sciences will request a mailed copy of your transcripts. Please note that only electronic submissions will be accepted in the application.
I am having technical problems with the online application system – who should I contact?gsas.admissions@nyu.eduWhat do I do if one of my references can’t use the online recommendation system?Please review the Graduate School of Arts and Science’sFAQ sectionfor the policies regarding letters of recommendation.
Standardized TestingWhat is the minimum cutoff for GRE, IELTS, and TOEFL?Many factors are taken into account in considering by the admissions committee. There is no minimum cutoff for standardized tests. However, for the IELTS, there is a recommended minimum band score of 7.0. For the TOEFL, there is a recommended minimum score of 100 on the internet-based test.
Do I have to take GRE?The GRE is optional for Fall 2022 applicants. We will consider GRE test scores if they are submitted.
Is it possible to waive the TOEFL scores?The Graduate School requires applicants who are not native English speakers to submit official TOEFL or IELTS score results. The TOEFL/IELTS requirement is waived if your baccalaureate or master’s degree was (or will be) completed at an institution where the language of instruction is English.
What is the Center for Data Science School Code for the GRE and the TOEFL?The school code for the GRE and TOEFL is 2596.
FinancialDoes NYU offer financial aid and/or scholarships?Current and past CDS PhD students admitted to our program have been offered fellowships covering tuition, fees, and health insurance. The fellowship includes a nine-month stipend, which for the 2021-2022 school year, is $37,348. These fellowship packages have been five year commitments. In addition to the fellowship, CDS has provided a one-time award for start-up expenses. PhD financial packages are reviewed on a yearly basis for new cohorts.
MiscellaneousCan I transfer credits?Please email Kathryn Angeles atkangeles@nyu.edufor more information on transferring credits.
Is it possible to do the program part time?At this time, it is not possible to complete the PhD in Data Science program as a part-time student.
Which programming languages will be used in each course?Programming languages are decided by the professor of each course. However, over the past few years, Python has been widely used.
How many courses should I plan to take each semester?The suggested full-time workload is three 3-credit courses per semester totaling 9 credits per semester. We do not recommend more than 3 courses per semester, as most courses have both significant mathematical content and programming assignments.
Are there any internships or volunteer opportunities in NYU Data Science?The NYU Center for Data Science helps to provide robust internship opportunities with business partners in the New York area, including some of the world’s largest companies working in data science, artificial intelligence and machine learning. Many of these companies are within walking distance of the campus.
Are Teaching Assistant (TA) or Research Assistant (RA) positions available for students enrolled in the program?We do not use the term “Teaching Assistant” but we do sometimes have grading and section leader positions available for qualified students. For further details about funding suggestions, please seehttp://gsas.nyu.edu/page/grad.financialaid.
Is there an online option?No, we do not offer the course online.
©2022 NYU CDS 7th floor, 60 5th Ave, New York, NY, 10011NYU Center for Data Science
