old id = 1756
ERN Workshops – EJP RD – European Joint Programme on Rare Diseases
2022
https://www.ejprarediseases.org/our-actions-and-services/training-and-education/ern-workshops

ERN WorkshopsEJP RD Funded ERN Training WorkshopsThe “Research Training Workshop” Callaimsat identifying workshop topics to train ERN researchers and clinicians in relevant innovative themes with a cross-ERN added value. Selected applicants will receive financial supportby EJP RDfor the organization of a2-days workshop forapproximately20 participants.
Training themesmayinclude innovative research methodologies, diagnostic research methodologies,interdisciplinary treatment approaches, such as gene therapy and transplantation, etc. Topics haveto beproposed by the ERNs or byinvestigators belonging toEJP RD beneficiary institutions.
Note:ERN workshops are open to interested persons (clinicians/scientists) affiliated to ERN (European Reference Networks) Full Member or Affiliated Partner Institutions. To see if your institution is part of the ERNs, visithttps://ec.europa.eu/health/ern_enand check the list ‘ERN members per country.’30MayFrom high throughput sequencing to diagnosis in immune mediated disorders ESID/ERN-RITA WorkshopGENERAL INFORMATION ConceptInborn errors of immunity (IEI) manifest as increased susceptibility to severe and/or recurrent infectious diseases, autoimmune or auto-inflammatory conditions, atopic manifestations, and malignancies. More than 450 IEI have been discovered, especially within the…09JunEJP RD ERN Workshop: Translational research on bone impairment in rare diseasesGENERAL INFORMATION ConceptBone impairment in rare diseases can affect many patients. Indeed, this concerns a vast number of pathologies: constitutional bone diseases such as osteogenesis imperfecta, achondroplasia or fibrous dysplasia of the bones/McCune Albright syndrome,…10JunEctodermal dysplasias: Training course and updateGENERAL INFORMATION ConceptEctodermal dysplasias (ED) are rare and orphan genetic conditions affecting the development and/or homeostasis of two or more ectodermal derivatives, including hair, teeth, nails, and certain glands (new definition, Wright et al, 2019).…14JunEJP RD ERN Workshop: Functional exploration of genetic variants in cardiac diseasesRegistration has been extended until 20 May 2022 -12hCEST GENERAL INFORMATION ConceptCardiomyopathies and channelopathies are severe and misunderstood diseases that affectmillions of patients worldwide. More than a thousand pathogenic variants have beenidentified in numerous genes,…04JulModelling & Simulation: Research Methodologies for Small Populations in Rare DiseasesGENERAL INFORMATION ConceptThe study of rare and complex diseases affects the sample size of the study population.Undoubtedly the study of small populations strictly relates to the need to generate bridging data. Low-prevalent and complex diseases…29SepComprehensive gene profiling, molecular tumor board (mtb) and artificial intelligence in the diagnosis and treatment of patients with rare adult cancersAll times are in EEST (Eastern European Summer Time) GENERAL INFORMATION Increased knowledge of cancer molecular biology and research methods development has enabled the spread of gene-guided treatment of cancer. In many hospitals Molecular Tumor…Introduction:After more than 20 years of Hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) research in Latvia it has been confirmed that at least 5% of unselected breast cancers and 15% of unselected ovarian cancers cases areBRCA1/2germline pathogenic variant carriers. However, in around 50% cases of HBOC specific family cancer history turned out to be absent and it is impossible to identify cancer free high-risk persons following only traditional diagnostic pathways. Accordingly, HBOC genetic population screening (GPS) is the only way to identify considerable proportion of presymptomatic high risk individuals in order to reduce the proportion of advanced stage breast and ovarian cancers, mortality form this rare disease and the related public spendings. HBOC GPS should be considered as an innovative approach as it has not been introduced in any particular region of Europe so far and there are many psychological, molecular and administrative aspects to be clarified.
Moreover, in 2022 PSCUH ERN GENTURIS team in collaboration with Riga Stradins University is going to launch the HBOC GPS feasibility pilot project to evaluate the optimal genetic testing strategy and psychometric evaluation of the participants.
Aim of the research and training workshop:to educate researchers and clinicians on Psychological, molecular and administration aspects of HBOC GPSParticipants and speakerswill involve representatives from several ERN GENTURIS partners, including, but not limited to Latvia, Estonia, Lithuania, Poland, Netherlands and Norway.
Event will be held in Riga, Latvia. Probably, September 15th, 16th, 2022, but this is still preliminary date.
The workshop is meant to be on a research method previously developed (“Training in genetics and genomics for primary health care workers”, Dr. E.J.F. Houwink) on how to design and assess effectiveness of a blended training with a focus on rare diseases based on prioritized educational needs, taking hemoglobinopathies as an example.
During the workshop we wish to explain how to design studies on how to develop training on rare diseases based on exploration and consensus on the role of different rare diseases taking hemoglobinopathies as an example and a blueprint for educational needs on rare diseases as they are perceived by medical care providers, patient advocacy groups and (non)clinical genetics professionals in secondary care. In the near future, we aim to submit preliminary research results in an international journal (EJHG), entitled “Exploring and prioritizing future rare diseases education in primary care, taking hemoglobinopathies as an example” and let them serve consecutive steps in our research projectRaising awareness for Sickle Cell Disease in Primary Health Careand refer to this workshop held by EJP RD. As stated above, this project will raise awareness for SCD in PHC with two manners of interdisciplinary education and eHealth. the methodology described above could be used by different ERNs for different rare diseases and the blueprint could serve to develop blended trainings on other rare diseases than hemoglobinopathies. We hope we explained the impact the workshop could have on future research on evaluating the effectiveness of the blended trainings on learnt competences. With regards to research on implementation, in the near future we wish to study effectiveness of referrals, but also patient satisfaction with the help received by their primary care professionals, blended care effectiveness on using the flowchart on how the PHC is guided through timelier diagnosing hemoglobinopathy carriers and therefore improved health care of patients with hemoglobinopathies and improved cost effectiveness of people with rare diseases in general.
GENERAL INFORMATION:Precision medicine is an emerging approach for disease treatment and prevention that accounts for individual’s clinical, physiologic, genetic and sociodemographic characteristics to provide more accurate prediction of disease course and therapy response.
Monogenic diabetes is an example of how precision diagnosis leads to improvement of disease treatment through genetic testing and Maturity Onset Diabetes of the Young (MODY) is a recognized model of functional precision medicine in clinical practice. However, there are many other rare diseases that could benefit from this aproach.
This workshop aims to explore the following:A final objective is to promote discussion in work groups and stimulate the elaboration of a future research project of precision medicine application and evaluation of its benefits.
TEACHING METHOD:Interactive lectures presentations, discussion in working groups, interactive debate. All participants will be encouraged to present ideias. Working group activities will be focused on plans for future research on this field.
PARTICIPANTSThe workshop is aimed at PhD students, clinicians, geneticists and molecular researchers who are involved in rare genetic diseases.
DATEMay 2023Advances in gene therapies are completely changing the possibilities we used to have to deal with devastating rare neurological disorders and dramatically changing our expectations regarding outcomes in these patients. More than 50 gene therapies could be in the clinical ground in the next 10 years, but there are still lots of uncertainties and challenges we need to cope with. The aim of this course is to discuss known barriers, challenges, and uncertainties in gene replacement therapies including the vision of different stakeholders (basic researchers, clinicians, patients, regulators, payers, and industry). The course will be divided into two days in which we deal with different bottlenecks. On the first day, we will review the state of the art in therapy development and problems of the current viral carriers, and possible solutions. On the second day, we will discuss the problems related to clinical implementation and safety.
Due to the limited size of face-to-face events, our plan is to have a hybrid model with free participation after online registration and 20 assistants who will be selected by ERN participation, age (those who will be leading this in Europe in 10 years to come) and previous demonstration of involving in gene therapy.
Built to protect and preserve the correct functioning of the brain by avoiding the entrance of potentially damaging molecules, the Blood-Brain Barrier (BBB) also prevents small and large therapeutic compounds from efficiently reaching the brain in case of disease. Indeed, the delivery of therapeutics to the brain cells faces many challenges that hinder the development and testing of novel therapies for brain and neurological disorders. Despite this, various strategies are currently being developed to improve the delivery of small and large molecules to the brain.
The workshop will provide an opportunity to present and discuss the most recent advancements in all aspects of research applied to the BBB: from basic biology and pathophysiology, to clinical and translational research.
The workshop will update all participants on the current and future opportunities for the management and treatment of many neurological disease.
The event is organised in collaboration with theBrains For Brain Foundationand will provide a unique opportunity for BBB experts from different backgrounds to come together and share their experience and ideas.
OBJECTIVESMETHODOLOGYOral presentations followed by an open discussion with all participants.
PARTICIPANTSThe workshop is aimed at PhD students, researchers, and clinicians of all levels who are involved in brain and neurological diseases and/or in vascular biology.
DATEFirst week of March 2022Featured LinksWhere we areThe EJP RD initiative has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement N°825575
