old id = 1757
Patients Training – EJP RD – European Joint Programme on Rare Diseases
2022
https://www.ejprarediseases.org/our-actions-and-services/training-and-education/patients-training

Patients TrainingThe training activities for rare disease patient representatives and researchers aim at:The training activities offered include:The EURORDIS Summer Schoolon Medicines Research & Developmentaims to provide rare disease patient advocates with the knowledge and skills needed tobecome experts in medicines research and development. Since 2015, researchers also attend the Summer School.
Over 20 experts, representing the various rare disease stakeholders, deliver the training each year. The topics covered include clinical trials methodology, clinical research, ethics in medicines development, regulatory affairs, health technology assessment and marketing authorisation.
TheEURORDIS Summer Schoolis made up ofone week of face-to-face training,held in Barcelona, preceded by pre-training with webinars and e-learning courses.
It also includes over 28 hours of free online training, which is available for anyone to take on theEURORDIS Open Academy Platform.
The 2022 edition of the EURORDIS Summer School will take place on 6-10 June 2022, exceptionally online, due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Registration is currently closed.
The EURORDIS Winter Schoolon Scientific Innovation and Translational Researchaims to deepen patient representatives’ understanding of howpre-clinical researchtranslates into real benefits for rare disease patients.
The training equips participants with knowledge and skills so they are empowered to effectively participate in discussions and co-design projects with stakeholders involved in rare disease research and research infrastructures.
Expert speakers and researchers, from across Europe, deliver the training each year. The topics covered include genetics, diagnostics, genomics, bioinformatics, artificial intelligence, gene therapy and drug repurposing.
TheEURORDIS Winter Schoolis composed ofone week of face-to-face training,held in Paris (at the Imagine Institute for Genetic Diseases), preceded by pre-training webinars and e-learning courses.
It also includes over 20 hours of free online training, which is available for anyone to take on theEURORDIS Open Academy Platform.
The next EURORDIS Winter School will take place on 21-25 March 2022, online.
Registration is currently closed.
The training for patient advocates on leadership and communication skills empowersEuropean Patient Advocacy Groups (ePAGs) advocates and other rare disease patient advocates to build strong partnerships with, and to be seen as a credible partner in, European Reference Networks (ERNs).
The training programme is composed of webinars and an intensive 2-day course. The topics covered include the building blocks of ERNs, the importance of integrating ERNs into national contexts and how to advocate for that integration, the role of patient advocates in ERNs, communication and leadership skills.
The last edition of this training, due to take place in November 2020, was postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The dates and details of the next edition will be released shortly.
The location of this training programme rotates between Istanbul (Acıbadem Üniversitesi), Rome (Istituto Superiore di Sanità) and Gdansk (Medical University of Gdańsk).
REGISTRATION IS NOW OPEN at thisLINKUNTIL the 13thof April 2022.
More informationThe Paediatric expert patients trainingaim at providing young rare disease patients with skills enabling them to get involved in clinical research. The planned activities include short workshops under the coordination of the TEDDY European Network of Excellence for Paediatric Research in collaboration with EURORDIS and the Sant Joan de Déu Research Foundation for 15 paediatric patients focusing on the following areas:The ‘paediatric patient experts training course’ will start in 2021 and will be carried out online because of the pandemic situation. When the situation allows, the training course will be developed face to face and will be hosted in the Partners’ home countries.
Registration is currently closed.
Featured LinksWhere we areThe EJP RD initiative has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement N°825575
