old id = 254
Quantum Computers Could Crack Bitcoin. Here's What It Would Take
2022
https://singularityhub.com/2022/01/30/quantum-computers-may-one-day-crack-bitcoin-heres-what-it-would-take

Quantum Computers Could Crack Bitcoin. Here’s What It Would TakeQuantum computers could cause unprecedented disruption in both good and bad ways, from cracking the encryption that secures our data to solving some of chemistry’s most intractable puzzles. New research has given us more clarity about when that might happen.
Modern encryption schemes rely on fiendishly difficult math problems that would take even the largest supercomputers centuries to crack. But the unique capabilities of a quantum computer mean that at sufficient size and power these problems become simple, rendering today’s encryption useless.
That’s a big problem for cybersecurity, and it also poses a major challenge for cryptocurrencies, which use cryptographic keys to secure transactions. If someone could crack the underlying encryption scheme used by Bitcoin, for instance, they would be able to falsify these keys and alter transactions to steal coins or carry out other fraudulent activity.
This would require far larger quantum computers than we have today, but exactly how big is unclear.
Anew paper inAVS Quantum Sciencefrom researchers at British startupUniversal Quantumhas worked out that it would take a machine with 317 millionto1.9 billion qubits to crack Bitcoin.
The range of qubits iswidebecause there’s a variable windowwithin which transactions are vulnerable. This is while they’re waiting to be processed, which normally takes between ten minutes to an hour. A quantum computer at the lower end of that scale would be able to pick off some transactions, but only 1.9 billion qubits would guarantee you could target all of them. Sometimes transactions can take as long as a day to go through, in which case the researchers calculated you would need only 13 million.
It’s important to note that these figures relate to a specific kind of quantum computer. Things like how long it takes to carry out a single operation or how much error creeps into calculations can vary significantly depending on the specific type of hardware used to build the quantum computer, and these factors can have alargeimpact on the number of qubits required.
To getaround this, the researchers created a tool that takes these hardware characteristics into account while calculating how big a device was needed for a specific problem. The figures above relate to a machine with one-microsecond operation times, which is typical for the superconducting quantum computers being built by Google andIBM.
Trapped ion devices, favored by Universal Quantum, IonQ, andHoneywell, have operation times closer to 235 microseconds.
For those that rely on silicon qubits, times can creep up into the milliseconds, which can significantly increase the number of qubits required.
The researchers also investigated another problem where quantum computers are expected to blow conventional ones out of the water: simulating molecules. The enormous complexity of calculating interactions between even small numbers of particles means most chemistry modeling relies on approximations, and even these require supercomputers. But quantum computers are governed by the same rules as atoms and molecules, and so given enough qubits, should be able to carry out exact simulations within reasonable timeframes.
One promising target for such modeling is theFeMoco moleculethat some plants and microorganisms use to fix nitrogen from the air. Understanding how it works could lead to massive efficiency gains in the production of fertilizers, an industry that currently usestwopercent of global energy supply.
Conventional computers are incapable of simulating the molecule, but the researchers found that a superconducting device could solve the calculations in 10 days using just 7.5 million qubits. Using the same number of qubits, a trapped ion device would take 2,450 days, which probably isn’t practical, but you can achieve a 10-day turnaround with a 600-million-qubit machine.
Thespecific design Universal Quantum is targetingdoes haveone trick up its sleeve, though. Superconducting qubits can only talk directly to their neighbors, and any long-range communication requires daisy chains of message-passing interactions that can suck up a lot of operations. In contrast, trapped ion computers are able to physically shuttle their qubits around to allow them to interact directly over much greater distances.
This reduces the number of operations required, which should in turn reduce the number of qubits needed. More importantly, it could open the door to new error-correction schemes that could be considerably more efficient than those used on superconducting devices.
Either way, the research suggests that both crackingBitcoinand solving nitrogen fixation are likely still a long way off. And more importantly, it shows that scalability is going to be hugely important for quantum computers, particularly for those based on trapped ions, which are likely to need considerably more qubits than their superconducting competitors.
Image Credit:Darwin LaganzonfromPixabayLooking for ways to stay ahead of the pace of change? Rethink what’s possible.
Join a highly curated, exclusive cohort of 80 executives for Singularity’s flagship Executive Program (EP), a five-day, fully immersive leadership transformation program that disrupts existing ways of thinking. Discover a new mindset, toolset and network of fellow futurists committed to finding solutions to the fast pace of change in the world.
Click here to learn more and apply today!Follow Edd:LatestThis Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through May 21)Volvo and DHL Are Partnering on Hub-to-Hub Autonomous TruckingHow a Volcanic Bombardment in Ancient Australia Led to the World’s Greatest Climate CatastropheRELATEDNanomagnetic Computing Could Drastically Cut AI’s Energy UseThe Ideal Qubit? Future Quantum Computers Could Crunch Data With Single Electrons on Neon IceScientists Just Cracked One-Way Superconductivity, Thought Impossible for Over 100 YearsHow the Extinction of Ice Age Mammals May Have Forced Us to Invent CivilizationGet the latest news from Singularity Hub!Singularity University, Singularity Hub, Singularity Summit, SU Labs, Singularity Labs, Exponential Medicine, Exponential Finance and all associated logos and design elements are trademarks and/or service marks of Singularity Education Group.
© 2022 Singularity Education Group. All Rights Reserved.
Singularity University is not a degree granting institution.
