old id = 2070
Events Archive - SpaceNews
2022
https://spacenews.com/events

SpaceNewsprovides this calendar as a free resource to our users.
Event submissions are reviewed before posting,so they will not show until approved.
The calendar is not maintained on a daily basis and some events may have changed or are no longer happening. Please double-check the event websites for the most up-to-date information.
Upcoming EventsEvents Search and Views NavigationEvents SearchEvent Views NavigationMay 2022International Space Development Conference 2022The National Space Society invites you to come learn about the current ideas and plans for space travel, space development and space settlements at the International Space Development Conference®. The 40th annual International Space Development Conference®, ISDC® 2022, hosted by the National Space Society will be held in Arlington, Virginia from May 27-29, 2022 at the Hyatt Regency Crystal City. The theme for ISDC 2022 is Living In Space. The NSS is dedicated to our vision: People living and working…June 2022Asia Satellite Business WeekHeld from 1 – 3 June, Asia Satellite Business Week will mobilize 200+ global space and satellite key players to share industry perspectives, network, and secure partnerships. Around 40 prominent industry speakers will take the stage to address satellite’s technology-driven hottest topics amongst which connectivity, remote sensing/EO, Artificial Intelligence, and new space, including industrial/launch activities up to in-orbit logistics & space exploration.
Symposium 365 Event ft. Space Technology Hall of Fame Inductee – Bubble Detector TechnologySpace Technology Hall of Fame® honors individuals, organizations, and companies for their contributions that increase public awareness for space exploration and innovation. In 2022, Space Foundation inducted Bubble Detector Technology into this prestigious group of pioneers and trailblazers. Discover how this company revolutionized how to identify and record levels of neutron radiation exposure to humans. Speakers: Dr. Harry Ing, President and CEO, Bubble Technology Industries Dr. Martin Smith, Manager of Research and Development, Bubble Technology IndustriesFrance Air Expo 2022France Air Expo 9-10-11 June 2022 International Exhibition of General Aviation This event has become one of the major events of general aviation in Europe and a major event for pilots, aero-clubs, professionals, and enthusiasts in the aeronautical sector. Date : Thursday 9th to Saturday 11th of June 2022 Location : Lyon Bron Airport – LFLY (France) Opening days / time : Thursday 9th and Friday 10th : 10h-18h, Saturday 11th : 10h-17h Entry price : 10 € (free for kids under 12 years old, must be…Symposium 365 Event: Space MattersSpace Foundation’s second season of Space Matters convenes well-known policy influencers for monthly high-level space policy conversations on emerging topics and trends within the global space economy. Speakers: James Bridenstine, Senior Advisor, Acorn Growth Company Carissa Christensen, CEO and Founder, BryceTech Laetitia Garriott de Cayeux, Founder and CEO, Global Space Ventures Robert Walker, Cheif Executive Officer, MoonWalker AssociatesLeveraging Commercial Space for Earth and Ocean Remote SensingCommercial advances in satellite system development, launch capabilities, and measurement technologies have led to a paradigm shift in the space industry. U.S. government agencies have the opportunity to leverage these new technologies, such as clusters of SmallSats, to support a wide range of science and intelligence applications. A recent National Academies’ report, Leveraging Commercial Space for Earth and Ocean Remote Sensing, identifies options for public-private partnerships and ways to integrate new capabilities from commercial space to achieve industry, government, and research objectives.…AIxSPACEThe space industry is experiencing an unprecedented pace of innovation and technology development, which is enabling a wider variety of applications and new use cases. Many stakeholders within the industry are now embracing artificial intelligence to push the limits in technology development and delivering value added solutions to their customers. Over the past years, we have seen a growing emergence of these AI applications in the space sector, such as autonomous decision making, astronaut medical assistance, data processing, anomaly detection…Space Foundation 365 Event ft. Space Technology Hall of Fame Inductee — CubeSatSpace Technology Hall of Fame® honors individuals, organizations, and companies for their contributions that increase public awareness for space exploration and innovation. In 2022, Space Foundation inducted CubeSat to this prestigious group of pioneers and trailblazers. Speakers: Dr. Jordi Puig-Suari Robert Twiggs4th Summit for Space SustainabilityThe 4th Summit for Space Sustainability is a high-level, multi-day event focused on developing solutions for space sustainability, hosted by the Secure World Foundation and the UK Space Agency, to be held on June 22-23, 2022, at the Science Museum in London.
July 2022Symposium 365 ft. Space Technology Hall of Fame Inductee – Beowulf Commodity Cluster Computing TechnologySpace Technology Hall of Fame® honors individuals, organizations, and companies for their contributions that increase public awareness for space exploration and innovation. In 2022, Space Foundation inducted Beowulf Commodity Cluster Computing Technology into this prestigious group of pioneers and trailblazers. Discover how this company revolutionized our computer systems worldwide.
Most Read (past 7 days)Upcoming EventsUpcoming EventsInternational Space Development Conference 2022Asia Satellite Business WeekSymposium 365 Event ft. Space Technology Hall of Fame Inductee – Bubble Detector Technology2022 Spacenews, Inc. All Rights Reserved
