old id = 309
This Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through September 25)
2022
https://singularityhub.com/2021/09/25/this-weeks-awesome-tech-stories-from-around-the-web-through-september-25

This Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through September 25)COMPUTINGAmazing Airborne Microchips Are the Tiniest Human-Built Objects to Take FlightGeorge Dvorsky | Gizmodo“Called ‘microfliers,’ the tiny devices ride the breeze while falling and leverage the powers of spin to fall in a slow and controlled manner. …[They range] in size, including versions as tiny as pebbles and even single grains of sand (the smallest versions measured 500 micrometers wide).”FUTUREThis AI Could Predict 10 Years of Scientific Priorities—if We Let ItTatyana Woodall | MIT Technology Review“[The team was] able to teach the AI to sift through thousands of abstracts to identify both low- and high-impact areas from two- and three-word topic phrases like ‘planetary system’ or ‘extrasolar planet.’ According to the researchers’ white paper, the AI successfully ‘backcasted’ six popular research themes of the last 10 years, including a meteoric rise in exoplanet research and observation of galaxies.”BIOTECHGlow-in-the-Dark Plants Could Act as Passive Lighting in Public SpacesMichael Irving | New Atlas“A decent chunk of energy usage goes towards lighting, so scientists at MIT are developing a new kind of passive lighting—glow-in-the-dark plants. In the latest experiment, the team has made them glow much brighter than the first generation plants, without harming their health.”SPACEChina Aims for a Permanent Moon Base in the 2030sAndrew Jones | IEEE Spectrum“The International Lunar Research Station (ILRS) is a complex, multiphase megaproject that the China National Space Administration (CNSA) unveiled jointly with Russia in June in St. Petersburg. Starting with robotic landing and orbiting missions in the 2020s, its designers envision a permanently inhabited lunar base by the mid-2030s.”ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCEAI Can Write Code Like Humans—Bugs and AllWill Knight | Wired“New tools that help developers write software also generate similar mistakes. …Despite such flaws, Copilot and similar AI-powered tools may herald a sea change in the way software developers write code. There’s growing interest in using AI to help automate more mundane work. But Copilot also highlights some of the pitfalls of today’s AI techniques.”SCIENCE FICTIONCould the Moon Actually Crash Toward Earth?Rhett Allain | Wired“There’s a trailerout for a new science fiction film calledMoonfall, to be released in early 2022, in which the moon is about to crash into Earth….This isn’t the first movie to stretch the bounds of believable physics. (RememberSharknado?) But just because it’s science fiction doesn’t mean it’s totally wrong. That’s why I’m here: I’m going to go over the actual physics that would apply if the moon ever got too close to us.”ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCEDeep Learning’s Diminishing Returns: The Cost of Improvement Is Becoming UnsustainableNeil C. Thompson, Kristjan Greenewald, Keeheon Lee, and Gabriel F. Manso | IEEE Spectrum“While deep learning’s rise may have been meteoric, its future may be bumpy. …today’s deep-learning researchers are nearing the frontier of what their tools can achieve. To understand why this will reshape machine learning, you must first understand why deep learning has been so successful and what it costs to keep it that way.”CRYPTOCURRENCYChina Cracks Down Harder on Cryptocurrency With New BanAmy Qin and Ephrat Livni | The New York Times“China intensified its crackdown on cryptocurrency on Friday, declaring all financial transactions involving cryptocurrencies illegal and issuing a nationwide ban on cryptocurrency mining, the power-hungry process in which vast computer networks compete for newly created crypto tokens. …The moves on Friday were the latest signal of Beijing’s determination to turn the screws on cryptocurrencies.”Image Credit:Mr.Autthaporn Pradidpong/UnsplashFollow Singularity:LatestThis Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through May 21)Volvo and DHL Are Partnering on Hub-to-Hub Autonomous TruckingHow a Volcanic Bombardment in Ancient Australia Led to the World’s Greatest Climate CatastropheRELATEDThis Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through May 21)This Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through May 14)This Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through May 7)How the Extinction of Ice Age Mammals May Have Forced Us to Invent CivilizationGet the latest news from Singularity Hub!Singularity University, Singularity Hub, Singularity Summit, SU Labs, Singularity Labs, Exponential Medicine, Exponential Finance and all associated logos and design elements are trademarks and/or service marks of Singularity Education Group.
© 2022 Singularity Education Group. All Rights Reserved.
Singularity University is not a degree granting institution.
