old id = 2693
As Moore's Law Slows, Chip Specialization Could Undermine Computing Progress
2003
https://singularityhub.com/2021/03/08/as-moores-law-slows-chip-specialization-could-undermine-computing-progress

As Moore’s Law Slows, Chip Specialization Could Undermine Computing ProgressFor decades, the computer chips that run everything from PCs to spaceships have looked remarkably similar. But as Moore’s Law slows, industry leaders are moving towardsspecialized chips, which experts say threatens to undermine the economic forces fueling our rapid technological growth.
The earliest computers were often designed to carry out very specific tasks, and even if they could be reprogrammed it would often require laborious physical rewiring. But in 1945, computer scientist John von Neumann proposed a new architecture that allowed a computer to store and execute many different programs on the same underlying hardware.
The idea was rapidly adopted, and the “von Neuman architecture” has underpinned the overwhelming majority of processors made since. That’s why, despite vastly different processing speeds, the chip in your laptop and one in a supercomputer operate in more or less the same way and are based on very similar design principles.
This made computers what is known as a“general-purpose technology.”These are innovations that can be applied to broad swathes of the economy and can have profound impacts on society. And one of the characteristics of these technologies is that they typically benefit from a virtuous economic cycle that boosts the pace of their development.
As early adopters start purchasing a technology, it generates revenue that can be ploughed back into further developing products. This boosts the capabilities of the product and reduces prices, which means more people can adopt the technology, fueling the next round of progress.
With a broadly applicable technology like computers, this cycle can repeat for decades, and indeed has. This has been the economic force that has powered the rapid improvement in computers over the last 50 years and their integration into almost every industry imaginable.
But in anewarticle inCommunications of the ACM,computer scientists Neil Thompson and Svenja Spanuth argue that this positive feedback loop is now coming to an end, which could soon lead to a fragmentedcomputingindustry wheresome applications continue to see improvements but others get stuck in a technological slow lane.
The reason for this fragmentation is the slowing pace of innovation in computer chips characterized by the slowdeath of Moore’s Law, they say. As we approach the physical limitsofhow much we can miniaturize the silicon chips all commercial computers rely on, the time it takes for each leap in processing power has increased significantly, and the cost of reaching it has ballooned.
Slowing innovation means fewer new users adopting the technology, which in turn reduces the amount of money chipmakers have to fund new development. This creates a self-reinforcing cycle that steadily makes the economics of universal chips less attractive and further slows technical progress.
In reality, the authors note that the cost of building state-of-the-art chip foundries has also risen dramatically, putting further pressure on the industry. For some time, the mismatch between market growth and increased costs has seen the number of chipmakers consolidate from 25 in 2003 to just3by 2017.
As performance boosts slow, this makes the case for specialized chips increasingly attractive, say the authors. The design decisions that make chips universal can be sub-optimal for certain computing tasks, particularly those that can run many calculations in parallel, can be done at lower precision, or whose computations can be done at regular intervals.
Building chips specially designed for these kinds of tasks can often bring significant performance boosts, but if they only have small markets then they typically improve more slowlyand cost morethan universal chips. This is why their uptake has historically been low, but with the slowdown in universal chip progress that’s starting to change.
Today all major computing platforms, from smartphones to supercomputers and embedded chips, are becoming more specialized, say the authors. The rise of the GPU as the workhorse of machine learning—and increasinglyofsupercomputing—is the most obvious example. Since then, leading technology companies like Google and Amazon have even started building their own custom machine learning chips, as have bitcoin miners.
What thismeans is that those with sufficient demand for their niche applications, which can benefit from specialization, will see continued performance boosts.
Butwherespecialization isn’t an option,chip performance islikely to stagnate considerably, the authors say.
The shift to cloud computing could help to mitigate this process slightly by corralling demand for specialized processors, but more realistically, it will take a major breakthrough in computing technology to jolt us back into the kind of virtuous cycle we’ve enjoyed for the last 50 years.
Given the huge benefits our societies have reaped from ever-improving computing power, bringing about that kind of breakthrough should be a major priority.
Image Credit:Tobias DahlbergfromPixabayFollow Edd:LatestThis Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through May 21)Volvo and DHL Are Partnering on Hub-to-Hub Autonomous TruckingHow a Volcanic Bombardment in Ancient Australia Led to the World’s Greatest Climate CatastropheRELATEDThis Portable Wind Turbine Is the Size of a Water Bottle and Charges Devices in Under an HourNanomagnetic Computing Could Drastically Cut AI’s Energy UseThe Ideal Qubit? Future Quantum Computers Could Crunch Data With Single Electrons on Neon IceHow the Extinction of Ice Age Mammals May Have Forced Us to Invent CivilizationGet the latest news from Singularity Hub!Singularity University, Singularity Hub, Singularity Summit, SU Labs, Singularity Labs, Exponential Medicine, Exponential Finance and all associated logos and design elements are trademarks and/or service marks of Singularity Education Group.
© 2022 Singularity Education Group. All Rights Reserved.
Singularity University is not a degree granting institution.
