old id = 4273
Full article: Halfway down the road to supervision of the Spanish intelligence services
1995
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/02684520600750687

Intelligence and National SecurityHalfway down the road to supervision of the Spanish intelligence servicesOriginal ArticlesHalfway down the road to supervision of the Spanish intelligence servicesAbstractThe CESID was created during the transition to democracy with obvious shortcomings in its administrative, judicial, governmental and parliamentary controls. These shortcomings contributed to the scandals of 1995 and 1998 that made deputies aware of the need for improvements in its supervision, although the timid initiatives that were finally adopted did nothing to improve the situation. The reform of 2002 that transformed CESID into CNI was presented as an opportunity to perfect supervision of the intelligence services. However, its achievements have not been as ambitious as might have been hoped. Supervision ever since the transition to democracy is still unfinished business, as was clearly demonstrated by the difficulties experienced in the work of the commission of inquiry into the terrorist attack of 11 March 2004.
IntroductionThe capacity of the intelligence services to cloak their activities in secrecy makes it necessary to develop satisfactory mechanisms for their supervision; a need that is all the more acute at a time when those very services are scaling up their actions in response to the threat of terrorism. The present article analyzes (i) the lack of a model for supervisory control over the Spanish intelligence services at the time of their creation, (ii) the attempts to mend this shortcoming as a result of the crises of 1995 and 1998, (iii) whether the reform of May 2002 – which created theCentro Nacional de Inteligencia(CNI) – managed to put an effective supervisory control mechanism in place and (iv) finally, the way in which these possible advances are called into question by the works of the commission of inquiry into the terrorist attack of 11 March 2004. In order to draw up this study, the author undertook 22 interviews with officials in the intelligence services, ministers and deputies sitting on the parliamentary committee overseeing the expenditure of secret funds. He also completed an exhaustive study of the business in which the different parliamentary committees on Defence, the Interior, Budgetary, and Foreign Affairs have been engaged since 1977.
1As a historical introduction, it should be made clear that the first Spanish intelligence service was created in 1977. TheHigher Defence Intelligence Centre(CESID) was brought into existence by President Suárez because of his express wish to rely on a new intelligence service that would break with the methods of espionage associated with the days of Franco and would become a staunch ally in the difficult transition to democracy, still in its early days. CESID arose from the fusion of Central Service of Documentation (SECED), an entity involved in internal espionage, and part of the military High Command, the upper echelons of the armed forces. Its first years were complicated by a lack of clarity regarding the mission it should follow, scarce resources, and the ineptitude of its directors who were not entirely convinced that keeping an eye on the more reactionary members of the military was meant to figure among their duties.
Problems with the supervision of the intelligence services became apparent at an early stage. Adapting to new democratic practices proved to be difficult for many members of the military, who formed part of the intelligence services and were all too used to undertaking acts of espionage on an independent footing. None other than the President of the Government, Adolfo Suárez had to instruct the intelligence service that spying on political parties had no place in a democracy and to force them to dismantle the system of telephone tapping installed in Telefónica, the national telephone company. This chaotic situation was at its height at the time of the 1981coup d'étatin which some members of CESID were implicated.
2Four different directors in four-and-a-half years and acoup d'étatbehind its back proved to be enough for the government to take a serious role in the matter. After thecoupthe new president, Calvo Sotelo, entrusted the management of CESID to General Alonso Manglano, who began its modernization and democratization, converting it over the following years into an effective intelligence gathering organization. But, in any case, the restructuring of the Spanish intelligence services was due to the pressing needs of the times that gave rise to very pragmatic attitudes and did not allow grand theoretical models to be drawn up as to which type of administration was the most appropriate.
Part of this pragmatism was visible in the absence of any reflection on how to supervise the intelligence service. In 1982, President González chose to put his trust in the good relations existing between the minister of defence, Narcís Serra, and Alonso Manglano, who was a solid and democratic director, leaving the upper and lower Chambers and the judiciary out of the picture. The consequences of this absence of specific supervisory mechanisms such as those used in neighbouring countries would be felt some years later. In 1995, it was leaked to the press that the Centre had spied on businessmen, journalists and leading figures in the country, including the King, which, as well as causing an immense social and political scandal, also cost the vice-president of the government, the minister of defence and the director of CESID their jobs; this scandal had its origin in documents appropriated by an ex-intelligence services chief (Juan Alberto Perote) and became known as the ‘caso Perote’.
3Later on, in 1998, during the government of the Partido Popular, it was discovered that the Centre had been spying onHerri Batasuna, the political arm of the terrorist group ETA, but in those days quite definitely a legal political party. The critical situation of the intelligence service over those years led to a clamour within parliamentary circles of all colours for it to be subjected to increased supervision.
Lack of a model for supervisory control over CESIDInternal control ofLa Casa, as it is known within the Spanish intelligence service, was exercised exclusively by its director. The role played by internal committees or security units was minimal and there was nothing comparable to figures such as the Inspector Generals in the United States. Due to this shortcoming, as the years passed by and the organization began to grow the director started to lose control over it, which was when the first illegal aspects that had been nascent within CESID were brought to light.
As regards judicial controls, these were also very weak. If the intelligence service needed to enter a home or monitor communications, this had to be done by a unit of the Police attached to CESID and always with the prior authorization of the session judge of theAudiencia Nacional, the Spanish High Court. However, as confirmed in many of the interviews with management figures from the Centre, this procedure it was not always followed.
For its part, ever since its creation, the Executive had delegatedde factosupervision of CESID to the minister of defence, Narcís Serra, through his close relations with the director, Alonso Manglano. However, no regulatory process existed through which the council of ministers could present CESID with its list of annual objectives. These were agreed between the minister and director, which meant that in 1995 when the scandal erupted President González stated that he had learnt about it all through the press. As a consequence of this lack of supervision and direction by the Executive over the intelligence service, the role that Parliament was able to play in its control was extremely limited.
4Nevertheless, it is worth pausing here for a moment, as there are even more reasons to explain the minimal role that the Chamber of Deputies has played in supervising the Centre:5i) no legislative body in particular was assigned the task of supervising the intelligence service; ii) there were no norms regulating access by deputies to the information needed to exercise control, and iii) there was an obvious lack of interest on the part of the opposition and successive governments in knowing what spies were up to.
Lack of a supervisory bodyArticle 66.2 of the Spanish Constitution confers upon Parliament the role of supervising the government and the administration of the state. However, as already pointed out, at the time of CESID's creation no specific mechanism was set up to supervise it. Consequently, as CESID lay within the ambit of the Ministry of Defence, its supervision fell to the minister of defence and, furthermore, fell under the scrutiny of the Defence Committee of the Congress of Deputies.
Towards the end of 1992, investigation into cases of corruption within the socialist government that was undertaken by Congress and that only slightly affected the activities of the intelligence service led to the emergence of another contentious issue: the improper use offondos reservados, or secret money.
6The inadequacies of existing rules prompted the enactment ofley 11/1995of 11 May 1995, a law regulating the use and control of credits allocated to secret funds. In article 7.1, it establishes that these funds will be controlled by a committee that will be constituted according to parliamentary rules that govern access to official secrets. This committee, attendance at which on a six-monthly basis is compulsory for those departmental heads whose departments are allocated such funds, functions in such a strange way that it does not even exist as such, no minutes are taken of its meetings and it is considered by Congress as ‘a procedural function of the full session’.
7Its definition under law is therefore unclear, but what is clear is that the committee on secret funds does not enjoy the same status as the other parliamentary committees, whether permanent or otherwise.
Working practice has meant that the political groups designate the same deputies to sit on the committee that oversees official secrets and the committee that oversees secret funds, even though there is nothinga priorithat might prevent a parliamentary group from designating different deputies. Those chosen have always been the spokespersons of the different parliamentary groups, with considerable political weight but little or no knowledge of intelligence matters and above all without the time to delve deeply into such a specific area of the Administration. The fact that they are key political figures with an intensely active political agenda in the front line of politics means that they systematically leak the contents of the meetings to the press. These leaks generate a great deal of resentment in the intelligence service that is expressed in the limited volume of information that it passes on to the committee. Succinctly put, parliamentary supervision over CESID's budgets as well as its compliance with objectives was minimal.
Lack of political mechanisms for deputies to obtain informationSince responsibility for supervision of CESID was attributed to the Defence Committee due to arrangements that were already in place it may be understood that no specific provision was made for deputies to access the information needed for its supervision. This led to extensive interpretations of the existing rules and a painfully slow search for new legal instruments through which deputies would be able to gain access to classified information. Bear in mind that it was not a matter of the possibility of arranging committee appearances or visiting installations, options which were indeed open to legislators from other states such as, for example, Germany, the United Kingdom, Finland, Norway or Portugal; but, at rather more of an preliminary stage, it was merely a question of the Chamber of Deputies gaining access to information.
As a first step, deputies sought legal arguments in the Constitution. Article 109 of the Constitution authorizes the parliamentary chambers and their committees, through their respective chairs, to seek the information and support that they require from the government and its departments, as well as from any authority belonging to the state or the Autonomous Communities. However, the only regulation that detailed anything related to such a general prerogative stipulated in the Constitution was the pre-constitutionalLey de Secretos Oficiales, a law on official secrets enacted in 1968, although reformed in 1978. Under article 10.2, this law confers on Parliament the right to access documentation regardless of whether it is ‘classified information’; however, in practice, its application should follow the formula established by the rules of the Congress of Deputies, or, in this case, access to information takes place in secret sessions. Once again, the same problems cropped up since no reference was made in the rulebook on parliamentary procedure to gaining access to this sort of documentation; for which reason, the Chamber systematically blocked deputies from consulting classified information.
In an attempt to resolve this situation, the presidency approved the resolution of 18 July 1986, which established a procedure for deputies to access this documentation. However, the resolution excluded access by individual deputies and granted it solely to committees or to one or more parliamentary groups that made up at least a quarter of all deputies in Congress. In March 1987, this situation led the Catalan deputy, Miguel Roca, along with 66 other deputies, to appeal to the Constitutional Tribunal against the rule, which excluded individual deputies from gaining access to this material and mathematically excluded their respective groups due to the percentage of deputies it required. The appeal was turned down on the grounds that the Tribunal considered that the rule of the presidency of Congress was a ‘decision or act of no legal standing’ and, as a consequence, could not be appealed against on legal grounds.
8In 1989, the same problems surfaced yet again and various deputies reiterated their complaints that they were unable to access information on matters such as the joint strategic defence plan or the planned reform of the army.
Seeking an end to this situation, on 2 June 1992 the presidency of the Congress adopted a further resolution on disclosures of official secrets to deputies. This rule once again caused agitation in theGrupo Mixtowhose deputies continued to see themselves as barred from accessing this sort of information, as once again the parliamentary group or groups requesting the information had to muster at least a quarter of all members of Congress.
9The end result was that, 15 years after the creation of CESID, deputies were still seeking a legal mechanism that would give them some insight into the activities of the intelligence services.
10The inability of deputies to access information has led to highly lamentable episodes. For example, during a debate in the Defence Committee at which the director of CESID was present, deputies began to delve into the objectives underlying the work of the Centre. Faced with the increasing intensity of the interventions, the chair of the committee was obliged to adjourn the debate so as not to break the rules of both the presidency of Congress and the 1986 agreement reached in the council of ministers.
11The lack of information has also driven deputies to use surprisingly varied sources and strategies. Deputies belonging toIzquierda Unidadevoted their time to asking questions that were at times abstruse or based on rumour in order to obtain information from the government and the intelligence service, sparking off a wave of replies to rumours by the Executive that propagated such rumours even more. This was not the most honest course of action in the opinion of those ministers and CESID chiefs who were interviewed, but it does undoubtedly demonstrate the difficult circumstances in which deputies had to conduct their supervisory work.
Perhaps the most tangible example of this absence of information available to deputies is visible in the sources from which they obtained it. An analysis of parliamentary activities related to the intelligence services shows how 65% of questions asked by deputies have their origin in news items published in the press. The proportion rises to 89% if we consider those initiatives of a reactive nature that occurred immediately after a scandal broke (Table 1). This clearly shows that once the control mechanism based on supervision of the minister and the CESID director had broken down, Parliament was unable to exercise control over the intelligence service.
Published online:TABLE 1 TYPE OF SUPERVISION BY INFORMATION SOURCEParliamentarians have confessed their total lack of mechanisms to gain insight into the intelligence service and have admitted that the press is important for them when obtaining information. Unlike what happens in other areas of the Administration, deputies cannot obtain information from the Centre because its members have always been under more or less express instructions to avoid contact with journalists and parliamentarians.
12Nevertheless, some veteran deputies who have seen various governments come and go in Congress have established relations with staff at CESID, from whom they admit to having obtained information, although not on operational activities. These employees, up against inadequate channels within the intelligence service, break the code of secrecy in order to draw the attention of the public to internal situations which they are not in agreement with, or due to their wish to influence events within the intelligence service by creating a favourable climate of opinion.
All of these episodes and the inexperience and insufficient knowledge on the part of most deputies have meant that the debates in the committee on secret funds are a long way off from exercising a true supervisory function. Those deputies who were interviewed stated that they had witnessed a series of documents pass before them that they were unable to recognize or interpret and complained that the explanations often consisted in mere thematic statements without going into any further detail.
Government and opposition parties lacking in political willOverwhelmed with other problems that are more urgent or more electorally attractive, all democratic governments, whatever their political colours, have always had confidence that control over CESID would be properly exercised by its director and the minister of defence. Something very similar could be said of the opposition parties: over the three first legislative terms of office, the intelligence services were not on their agendas, and they account for no more than 13 parliamentary initiatives (Table 2). Deputies from these legislatures who were interviewed by the author freely admit to this lack of interest, due in part to the excessive workload of the Defence Committee in matters such as the planned reform of the armed forces, known as thePlan Norte, or entry into NATO that took up all of their attention. Interest in supervising the intelligence services emerged during the fifth legislative assembly motivated by the various scandals referred to asGAL,Roldán,Perote, andBanestoand the telephone tapping of leading figures of state.
13Activity in the sixth legislative assembly (1996–2000) centred around the discovery of telephone taps put in place in the headquarters ofHerri Batasunain Vitoria in 1998, as well as the dying embers of those scandals that had erupted in the previous legislatures owing, fundamentally, to thecaso Perote.
Published online:TABLE 2 PARLIAMENTARY MOTIONS BY LEGISLATIVE TERM AND POLITICAL PARTYThe different parties have played very unequal roles in the supervision of the intelligence service. The socialists, during their time in office as much as in opposition, have been more staid in their criticism and in exercising supervision. For their part, during their years in opposition, thePartido Popularexercised such severe supervision over CESID activities that even deputies of that same political grouping privately recognize it as being irresponsible. Once in government, it attempted to take control of the situation and, as a result, over the legislatures during which the PP held the reins of power it did not initiate any parliamentary business related to the intelligence services. The communists have shown a great desire to supervise CESID because of their belief that it systematically violates civil liberties and civil rights, which has resulted in their initiating almost half of all parliamentary business in this field. Other groups with significant political weight, such as the Basques or the Catalans, have not paid the least attention to the Centre; and have been behind only 3% of all parliamentary business due to their specific interests being far removed from the important affairs of state and due to their absence on the Defence Committee.
This generalized disinterest is an objective fact, but in order to find out whether it has affected the level of supervision exercised over CESID, it was thought useful to analyze those issues in which parliamentarians have shown most interest and whether their activities have been proactive or reactive. Six main areas were drawn up in which the parliamentary initiatives have centred, along with a further category for miscellaneous items: economy, structure, function, international, judicial, personnel and miscellanea. As is evident fromTable 3, the greater part of them relate to the functioning of the intelligence service (Functions), standing at 35%, and budgetary supervision (Economy), at 11%, which confirms that, just as in other Parliaments,14the two principal concerns of Spanish parliamentarians are the objectives and the budgets of the intelligence service. It is striking that the category made up of matters relating to the Centre's personnel or collaborators represents 10% of the total. This figure is relevant when analyzing proposals that aim to include supervision of service personnel within the responsibilities of the supervisory functions of the parliamentary committee as is already the case in Canada.
Published online:TABLE 3 INITIATIVES BY CATEGORY AND PARLIAMENTARY GROUPAs may be seen inTable 1, 35% of parliamentary business related to supervision of the intelligence service is proactive, whereas 65% is reactive; which is to say, only one-third of all business has been directed at ‘attempting’ to stay informed and to supervise the spies. Attempting is a deliberate choice of words because, in the first place, when analyzed on a case by case basis, it may be seen that 30% of the initiatives were not in fact brought to a satisfactory conclusion; a percentage that rises to 50% where the object of the initiative was the structure of CESID. In second place, because the government brandished the secret nature of the information in order not to reply to deputies and, finally, because when the government did respond, it was such a scant response that it verged on parliamentary discourtesy.
15The reforms of 2002: A missed opportunityThe reforms of 2002 generated great expectations as the timid attempts at improving matters introduced after each of the different crises in the mid-1990s had not had the least effect. In 1995, a general secretariat was created within CESID with the aim of putting order in a structure that had reached a size and complexity beyond that which could be managed solely by the director.
16Moreover, a security unit was established that would oversee the protection of the Centre's personnel, its installations and the documentation under its guard to avoid a new scandal similar to thecaso Perote.
17However, this measure was clearly aimed at creating a particular climate of opinion since this unit, although weak, had always existed and did not therefore suppose anything new within the structure of CESID. All of these measures proved futile, since three years later, when it was discovered that the Centre had subjectedHerri Batasunato surveillance, the minister affirmed that the revelation had been due to ‘internal errors’ and ‘leaky structures’.
18At a judicial level, theAudiencia Nacionalrequested the documentation required to investigate the cases of spying on the King and other leading figures of state from CESID which it refused to release on the grounds that it constituted classified information. The request ended up in the council of ministers that also refused to declassify it; yet again, events confirmed how governmental control over such documentation tended to be absolute, thus turning judges into a very necessary counterbalance, although not always with the desired results.
19Within the Executive, Eduardo Serra, minister of defence in the first government of Aznar, publicly and unambiguously defended the idea that to prevent CESID from acting autonomously the best course of action would be to set out its objectives clearly.
20With this in mind, in November 1997 he requested that the council of ministers approve of a list of objectives for the Centre; however, all he managed to achieve was that the cabinet ‘took note of the information’.
21Through this refusal to approve CESID's objectives at a formal level and the use of such a vaguely worded phrase, the government was attempting to leave the door open to legal arguments – albeit extremely weak ones – through which it could deny any knowledge of events should it ever face legal action alleging responsibility. In spite of all that, it could also be seen as a great success as up until that date the list of CESID's objectives had never even reached the cabinet. Finally, at a parliamentary level, all that was achieved was a widespread awareness on the part of deputies that it was necessary to subject the intelligence service to greater scrutiny, but the absence of appropriate mechanisms and procedures would not allow this to happen without the introduction of further reforms.
These repeated shortcomings demonstrated the extent to which, two decades after the transition to democracy, supervision of the intelligence service continued to be an area where improvements were still pending; for this reason, when the reform of the intelligence services was approved in May 2002, expectations were given a new lease of life. The reform was composed of two laws. The first replaced the old CESID with a new, dapper National Intelligence Centre (Centro Nacional de Inteligencia –CNI) that continues its organizational links with the Ministry of Defence and is functionally dependent on the president's office of the government; the second of the two laws regulates prior judicial approval of CNI activities.
The reform introduced changes in all four areas that have been analyzed in this paper, but they were not perhaps sufficient to solve the problems associated with supervision of the Spanish intelligence service. Internally, the structure has been made more flexible to increase its capacity to adapt to threats that are in constant mutation and has stepped up its controls in view of an increased number of agents and the development of internal networks for electronic communication.
With regard to objectives being set by the Executive, important changes have indeed been made. The process has been formalized through a council on intelligence affairs that brings together members of the Spanish intelligence community. The law states that this council shall propose the annual objectives for the CNI to the president of the government; these objectives shall then be incorporated into a proposal for an Intelligence Directive that will at a later date have to be approved by the Executive.
In the law relating to the CNI, a single article establishes parliamentary control over the intelligence service. This function falls to the existing parliamentary committee that oversees and supervises secret funds.
22Chaired by the president of the Congress of Deputies, its agenda as well as its proceedings must be kept secret. Its mission will be to scrutinize the objectives of the intelligence services that are established each year by the government, the annual report drawn up by the director of the CNI on the evaluation of the activities and the situation regarding the objectives drawn up for the service as well as the degree to which those have been met. The committee members will have access to classified material, except for the information related to sources and resources of the CNI or that provided by foreign intelligence services or international organizations.
Deputies are only able to consult these documents in committee sessions and are not allowed to keep copies or originals. The law is very terse as regards the scope of the committee and it makes no reference to the possibility of deputies requesting the appearance of intelligence service personnel, of visiting their headquarters or consulting documentation, possibilities which are open to deputies from countries such as the United States of America, Germany, the United Kingdom or Australia. Supervision is exclusively centred on the CNI, which means that that such important issues as terrorism or organized crime, in which information gathered by law enforcement bodies, such as theGuardia Civiland the Police, plays a key roles, fall outside of the system of supervision, except for matters that may be dealt with in the Interior Committee of Congress.
On 11 May 2004 Congress approved a new resolution that modified the one of 1992, which opened up the committee on secret funds to broader membership. This new formula allows minority groupings to have one member on the committee, which had up until then been their major criticism. With the support of three-fifths of the Chamber, each parliamentary group can appoint a representative who will be allowed to access official secrets. Nevertheless, this formula effectively allows any of the two large parties to veto the presence of a group when it considers that their loyalty, as well as the use to which they might put the information made available to them, is questionable. This reform was made possible following the illegalization ofBatasunaand its exclusion from Parliament; let us not forget that the presence of political groups of questionable constitutional loyalty had been the main obstacle and that Vice-President Serra went so far as to state in no uncertain terms that ‘information could not be given to someone who might make ill use of it at a later date’.
23The other law that defined the reform of 2002 introduces prior judicial approval of its activities.
24The sole article of this law establishes that all measures that affect the inviolability of private premises and the confidentiality of communications must be authorized by a magistrate from the Supreme Court (Tribunal Supremo) specifically appointed for this task. The request must be made formally and in writing by the director of the CNI and must specify the required measures, the circumstances in which the request is grounded, the objectives that motivate it and the reasons supporting the adoption of such measures; it must also include details of the affected person or persons, if known, and the location at which they are to be put in place.
These measures cannot last for longer than 24 hours in cases of entering premises and three months in the case of interception of communications sent by post, telegraph, telephone or by any other medium. Both periods may be extended for times of equal duration whenever necessary. The magistrate shall, within a period of 72 hours that cannot be extended, concede or refuse the requested authorization; this deadline may be reduced to 24 hours whenever justified on the grounds of urgency by the CNI, notwithstanding which the request must contain all of the information mentioned above. The content of these measures will be classified as secret.
The law establishes that the measures may be requested whenever ‘they are needed to comply with the duties of the Centre’.
25In addition to being brief, this justification is scandalously lax and has a component that goes beyond a legal definition converting it into a political act that has led one author to defend the opinion that this type of prior judicial approval leads to ‘the politicization of the judge or makes a nonsense of the control mechanism’.
26The wording in question is hardly acceptable and was profoundly criticized even by theConsejo General del Poder Judicial– a regulatory body of judges – that issued its own opinion prior to the approval of the law that rang alarm bells over the imprecise wording of the regulation that was to be approved. Its concern arose because the law encroached upon the thorny field of the rights and liberties of individual citizens. In addition, Spain had important examples in Canada, New Zealand, Australia, the United Kingdom, Germany or the Netherlands with which it could have designed a mechanism for prior judicial appeal of greater quality and with better guarantees than that adopted in 2002.
The terrible attacks of 11 March 2004 in Madrid confirmed that the reform had not solved the problems of supervisory control as far as the intelligence service was concerned. Following the electoral defeat of 14 March, the government of thePartido Populardeclassified various CNI document with the sole objective of proving that it had acted as it should have done during the crisis. This measure broke the legal requirements of theLey de Gobierno, which lays down that an interim government shall only take decisions affecting the ordinary functions of the state, and caused a deep sense of unease in the intelligence service.
After intense discussions, a parliamentary commission of inquiry was set up to clarify everything surrounding the attacks. The commission, presided over by a deputy from the minority grouping,Coalición Canaria, had been given a confused mandate. Whereas the interests of thePartido Popularlay in demonstrating that the attacks had affected the results of the election, the government of the Socialist party centred its efforts on analyzing the lack of foresight of the previous government and what had taken place between 11 and 13 March. The work of this ineffectual commission of inquiry, in which each parliamentary group reached its own conclusions and only the proposals on future improvements achieved a consensus, demonstrates once again the weaknesses of the supervisory mechanisms that are available to deputies.
When the members of the commission began to request classified documents, the problems of the past once again repeated themselves. Not one of them was able to access the documentation except for the president of the commission of inquiry who, as chance would have it, sat on the committee on secret funds. The documents in question amounted to a total of 64, some of which the council of ministers decided to declassify, while others were made available to the official secrets committee (which in reality meant that the members of this committee immediately informed colleagues from their own parties sitting on the commission of inquiry into the events of 11 March), others were handed over to the commission of inquiry but without being declassified, and others were not declassified as they had been made available by international organizations or foreign intelligence services. Besides, inexperience of these matters converted the debates into political slanging matches without them having clearly established what happened and the summary report of the judicial inquiry is awaited to gain a detailed picture of everything surrounding the Madrid attacks.
For its part, the judge of theAudiencia Nacionalsitting on the case of 11 March 2004 requested the CNI documents that might be relevant to the proceedings. Evidently, the judge is unaware of what information could be of interest to him and therefore that decision has been left in the hands of the CNI. This has allowed the intelligence service to decide that there were only four documents that would be of interest to the judge, two of which had already been examined by members of the commission of inquiry meeting behind closed doors. Following CNI advice, on 16 September 2005 the council of ministers ordered the declassification and submission to the judge of the documents with the proviso that they be treated as highly confidential. The minister of defence, opposed to the idea of handing over any documents, made a statement to the press before the meeting of the council of ministers, saying ‘no important documents were going to be declassified as this might help the terrorists’, which would rather suggest that not all the material of interest has been handed over to the judiciary.
ConclusionsSupervision of the Spanish intelligence service has been quite ineffective from all points of view. Even though they did not all happen at once, with the passage of time and because of the lack of internal control mechanisms, extremely poor guidance on the part of the Executive, the absence of judicial power and weaknesses in the supervision exercised by Parliament, scandals did erupt over the telephone taps on leading figures of state in 1995 and surveillance ofHerri Batasunain 1998; possibly representing the tip of the iceberg as regards illegal practices that have yet to be brought to light. These scandals made a compelling case for a number of modifications in the mid-1990s that did not obtain better results, leaving in their wake an inconclusive episode in the supervision of Spanish intelligence.
The reform of 2002 represented a missed opportunity to step up supervision of the intelligence service, above all from the judicial and parliamentary perspectives, that were all dealt with under only two articles of law. The model of parliamentary supervision that is central to the 2002 reform had already been put into practice in past legislative periods and had exposed the weaknesses of the procedures and mechanisms available to deputies to obtain information and, above all, the lack of continuity to ensure effective supervision. It does not, therefore, seem likely that in the near future any improvements are going to be seen in the supervision of the activities of the intelligence service, a point of view that has been confirmed by the conversations held by the author with members of the committee on secret funds.
The role that the judiciary is allowed to play is not a very important one as too often it is ensnared by the justifications put forward by the intelligence service. Nobody will oversee the authorizations granted by the magistrate, which may mean that their approval will become a blind routine, and that is not very healthy for a system of supervisory control. Perhaps an intense period of apprenticeship between the intelligence service and the judiciary will be needed in order to arrive through casuistry at a type of supervision without precedent in Spain.
The work of the commission of inquiry of 11 March 2004 made evident once again that in the absence of parliamentarians with the necessary experience and qualifications who are authorized to access information, supervision of CNI remains a virtual fallacy. Alongside this, the limited capacity of judges to access the documentation they require for judicial proceedings shows how supervision of the Spanish intelligence service remains halfway down the road.
Notes1 Six-hundred files were initially selected from the archives of theCongreso de los Diputados(the lower chamber of the Spanish Parliament) of which only 252 were considered to be directly related to the activity of the intelligence services. Those examined that relate to theReglamento de 1992or theLey de 1995, which regulate the use and control of credits allocated to secret funds, are analyzed quantitatively but not qualitatively as they are treated as confidential and no minutes exist of any meetings held on such matters. In order to analyze parliamentary activity, parliamentary groups were taken as the unit of analysis, since in accordance with parliamentary rules all deputies are under an obligation to belong to a parliamentary group, which in practice usually corresponds to a political party. Those who do not belong to a group are automatically incorporated in theGrupo Mixto, an assortment of deputies of the most diverse colours of the political spectrum.
2 Detailed coverage of this and other aspects related to Spanish intelligence may be found in Antonio M. Díaz Fernández,The Spanish Intelligence Services. From the Civil War until 11-M. The History of a Transition(Madrid: Alianza Editorial 2005).
3 The publication of the documents in thecaso Peroterevealed how the Centre taped mobile phone conversations of key figures in the political, social and economic life of Spain, including the King. No one was ever able to confirm whether they had been targeted at random, as was made out by CESID, or whether the electronic surveillance of these people had been premeditated.
4Intelligence Practice and Democratic Oversight – A Practitioner's View, DCAF Intelligence Working Group, Occasional Paper No. 3, July 2003, p.43.
5 These are three of the four conditions established for efficient parliamentary supervision of the security sector inParliamentary Oversight of the Security Sector(UIP and DCAF, 2003) chapter 13.
6 Article 1 ofLey 11/1995sets out in law that the secret funds are ‘those that are allocated as such in the laws onPresupuestos Generales del Estado(state budgets) and that are intended to meet expenditure that is considered necessary for the defence and security of the state’. It was initially regulated in theOrden de 1 de marzo, 1985on the preparation of the 1986 budgets and by theResoluciónon budgets of the General Directorate of Budgetary Planning of 15 March 1985. Subsequently, in theOrden del Ministerio de Economía y Hacienda de 13 de febrero de 1989, underSubconcepto 08, the definition of secret expenditure was established which stated that it was expenditure necessary for the defence and security of the state and set out its fundamental difference with respect to the rest of public expenditure, as regards its publication and justification. Even though the chosen term in the most recent regulations is secret funds, it is still entered as secret expenditure in the general budgets of the state.
7 Database of the Congress of Deputies. Accessed on 12 November 2002.
8 Sentence of theTribunal Constitucional 118/1988of 20 June and the particular opinion of magistrate Francisco Rubio Llorente. For commentary on this appeal, see Juan Cano Bueso,Información parlamentaria y secretos oficiales(Barcelona: Institut de Ciències Polítiques i Socials 1987).
9 The objective of this rule was to ensure the political partyHerri Batasunacould not be represented on this committee. The adopted formula, nevertheless, meant the systematic exclusion of the rest of the minority parties present in the Chamber such asEusko Alkartasuna,Esquerra Republicana de Catalunya,Unión ValencianaorPartido Aragonés.
10 For a detailed analysis of the legal arguments that these matters have generated in recent years see Ricardo Medina Rubio,La función constitucional de las Comisiones Parlamentarias de investigación(Madrid: Universidad de Alicante and Ed. Civitas 1994); Blanca Lozano,La desclasificación de los secretos de Estado(Madrid: Ed. Civitas 1998); AAVV,Instrumentos de información de las Cámaras parlamentarias(Madrid: Centro de Estudios Constitucionales 1994); AAVV,Problemas actuales del control parlamentario. VI Jornadas de Derecho Parlamentario(Madrid: Congreso de los Diputados 1997); Pilar Cousidó González,Comentarios a la ley de Secretos Oficiales y su Reglamento(Barcelona: Ed. Bosch 1995); Luis María Díez-Picazo,Sobre secretos oficiales(Madrid: Civitas 1998); María Torres Bonet,Las comisiones de investigación, instrumentos de control parlamentario del gobierno(Madrid: Congreso de los Diputados 1998).
11 Budgetary Committee No. 55 of the IV legislature, 21 March 1990. Intervention of the Chair, ‘Ladies and gentlemen, Deputies, for all of these committee appearances, we have I believe been guided by a very broad interpretation with respect to the limits that were supposedly to lay out budgetary procedures more clearly. There may be other items in play here, which are not only procedural, and therefore, with great regret and referring you to what may be said in other committees, I do hereby draw this debate to a close. You will have to understand me, señor Romero’, p.1301.
12 Article 7 of the procedural rules of the Congress of Deputies establishes that ‘In order to better undertake their parliamentary duties, Deputies, with the prior knowledge of their respective Parliamentary Group, will be authorized to seek from the Public Administrations such data, reports or documents that they hold in their possession.’13 All of these scandals implied cases of corruption that were close to government and involved to a greater or lesser extent the intelligence services. The case ofGALwas an attempt by the government to wage a dirty war against the terrorist group ETA;Roldánwas a director of theGuardia Civilwho fled the country after it was discovered that he had appropriated public funds;Banestowas the name of the bank presided over by Mario Conde who purchased documents thatPerotehad removed from CESID with the aim of blackmailing the government and avoiding a stay in prison because of problems that the bank was experiencing and which had resulted from his mismanagement.
14Intelligence Practice and Democratic Oversight(note 4) p.47.
15 For example, when on occasions a deputy asked about changes to a budgetary item to deal with a particular theme, the answer limited itself to indicating that this entry had increased in response to new necessities.
16Real decreto 1169/1995, of 23 June, by which the administrative structure of CESID was modified.
17Real decreto 266/1996, of 16 February, by which the basic administrative structure of CESID was modified.
18 Appearance of the minister of defence, Eduardo Serra, before the Defence Committee No. 431 of the VI legislature, 21 April 1998, p.12487 and in the session on supervisory control of the Senate, 10 June 1998.
19Intelligence Practice and Democratic Oversight(note 4) p.53.
20 ‘The government, gentlemen, has not only given it a general order to act within the law, but has made it clear to the Centre what information constitutes the objectives that it must pursue. It has fixed the objectives, has said which courses of action are open to it in order to accomplish all of the objectives set by the Ministry of Defence.’ Speech by the minister of defence, Eduardo Serra in the Defence Committee No. 287 of the VI legislature, 7 October 1997, p.8263.
21 Press statement by the Ministry of Defence after the meeting of the council of ministers.
22Ley 11/2002, of 6 May, the law that regulates theCentro Nacional de Inteligencia.
23 See the speech of Vice-President Serra in Plenary Session No. 160 of the V legislature, 29 June 1995. An appearance by the government, before the full session of the Chamber, to address the information concerning CESID. ‘Ladies and Gentlemen, what government that considers itself to be a responsible one will appear before Deputies who have access to official secrets, if it is aware that one of these Deputies might use that information with party political interests in mind and lie…?’, p.8558.
24Ley orgánica 2/2002, of 6 May, the law regulating prior judicial approval for the activities of theCentro Nacional de Inteligencia.
25 Article 1.1 of ibid.
26 Fernando Santaolalla López, ‘Actos políticos, inteligencia nacional y Estado de Derecho’,Revista Española de Derecho Constitucional65 (2002) p.123.
Related researchPeople also readlists articles that other readers of this article have read.
Recommended articleslists articles that we recommend and is powered by our AI driven recommendation engine.
Cited bylists all citing articles based on Crossref citations.
Articles with the Crossref icon will open in a new tab.
Browse journals by subjectArea StudiesArtsBehavioral SciencesBioscienceBuilt EnvironmentCommunication StudiesComputer ScienceEarth SciencesEconomics, Finance, Business & IndustryEducationEngineering & TechnologyEnvironment & AgricultureEnvironment and SustainabilityFood Science & TechnologyGeographyGlobal DevelopmentHealth and Social CareHumanitiesInformation ScienceLanguage & LiteratureLawMathematics & StatisticsMedicine, Dentistry, Nursing & Allied HealthMuseum and Heritage StudiesPhysical SciencesPolitics & International RelationsSocial SciencesSports and LeisureTourism, Hospitality and EventsUrban StudiesInformation forOpen accessOpportunitiesHelp and informationKeep up to dateRegistered in England & Wales No. 30990675 Howick Place | London | SW1P 1WGWe use cookies to improve your website experience. To learn about our use of cookies and how you can manage your cookie settings, please see ourCookie Policy.
By closing this message, you are consenting to our use of cookies.
Your download is now in progress and you may close this windowLogin or register to access this featureRegisternow orlearn more
