old id = 1695
Master’s in Data Science – NYU Center for Data Science
1009
https://cds.nyu.edu/masters-faq

NYU Center for Data ScienceHarnessing Data’s Potential for the WorldMaster’s in Data ScienceFAQFAQAcademicsWhere can I find the academic integrity policy?NYU’s academic integrity policy can be foundon the NYU Academic Integrity page. NYU’s Statement on Academic Integrity is also posted atCitation Style Guide: NYU Statement on Academic Integrity.
GSAS’ statement academic integrity can be found on ourGSAS Statement On Academic Integrity.
What should I do if I have questions about the academic integrity policy?If you have questions about the academic integrity policy, please reach out to faculty and/or the CDS Director of Academic Affairs, Kathryn Angeles, who can be reached atkangeles@nyu.edu.
What citation and data management resources are available to me as a Data Science student?There are several resources that you can reach out to if you have questions about citation and data management.
Are students required to take courses every semester?Students are required to be continuously enrolled every Fall and Spring semester. If there is a semester where you do not want to take courses, please reach out to Kathryn Angeles (kangeles@nyu.edu) to discuss possibility and options. This requirement is not applicable to the summer semester.
What is a full-time course load for CDS students? What is a part-time course load for CDS students?What can I expect regarding work load?Students should plan on spending 10 – 15 hours per week per data science course, assuming they have all the prerequisites. The data science courses are graduate level courses which go extremely quickly and it is difficult to catch up if you fall behind. Use your resources and ask questions!Is there a minimum GPA for the program?Yes, each semester, students must have a minimum GPA of 3.0 and must successfully complete 66% of credits attempted.
Where can I find the MS in Data Science curriculum?This information can be found on ourCourse Offerings page.
What is the process for waiving required Data Science courses?Typically, required Data Science courses are not waived. However, if you feel strongly that your expertise meets all the learning objectives for a required course, please email the information below to Kathryn Angeles atkangeles@nyu.edu:Where can I find important registration dates (add/drop deadline, late registration start, etc.)?The academic calendar will have this information, which you can find on ourAcademic Calendar page.
I’m having trouble with Albert and registration. What should I do?Registration help guides can be found on theRegistering on Albert page. There are guides on add/drop, the swap function, and other important registration steps.
I want to register for a non-Data Science course? What should I do?Email Tina Lam (tina.lam@nyu.edu) the course information. She will let you know what the registration process is for that particular department or school.
Where can I find a list of approved electives for the MSDS program?This information can be found on ourCourse Offerings page.
There is a course that I would like to take as an elective for the MSDS program, but it is not on thepre-approved elective list. What should I do?Please completethe Elective Request for DS Students Google form.
You will be asked for the below information.
If you have any questions, please contact Tina Lam (tina.lam@nyu.edu).
How many independent study (DS-GA 1010) credits can I apply to the MSDS degree?MSDS students can apply up to 6 credits of independent study (DS-GA 1010) to the MSDS degree. However, students can request exceptions to this policy. Email Tina Lam (tina.lam@nyu.edu) if you would like to request an exception.
Can I take a course pass/fail and count it towards the MSDS degree?Only 1 elective (this does not include the “One Data Science Elective” requirement) and DS-GA 1009 can be taken as pass/fail and count towards the MSDS degree. Students cannot take required courses for the degree as pass/fail.
I will be ready to graduate at the end of this semester. What should I do?You will need to apply for graduation during the graduation application period. For information on how to apply and the deadlines, visit thispage.
If you have other questions for this page, please emailcds-masters@nyu.edu.
AdmissionsWhere can I find general information about NYU’s MS in Data Science program?Navigate to ourMaster’s in Data Science Admissions page.
Where can I find general information about NYU’s PhD in Data Science program?Navigate to ourPhD Overview page.
Is the degree offered online?No, we do not have an online program.
Will most of the classes be offered at night?Most of the required courses are offered in the evenings. Elective courses are offered both during the day and in the evenings.
May I apply for more than one graduate degree at NYU?That depends on how your multiple applications are split up over the NYU schools. You can apply concurrently to as many NYU schools as you wish. Some schools allow you to apply to multiple programs. However, the MS in Data Science is part of the Graduate School of Arts and Science, which permits only one application at a time. Please note that you can find the full Graduate School of Arts and Science policy onthe NYU GSAS General Application Policies page.
May I take courses without applying for a degree?Yes, we do admit non-degree students. SeeGSAS Non-Degree and Visiting Student Application for Admission pagefor more information on the application process. There is a limit on the number of such courses you can take as a non-degree student.
I’m currently a student at NYU. How can I apply for the MS in Data Science?Students enrolled in any other NYU graduate program must submit a new application. NYU students enrolled in a Courant graduate degree must also submit a new application. Students in a Courant graduate program cannot apply for a transfer.
Do I have enough programming experience?See ourMaster’s Admission Requirements pagefor the prerequisite information.
Which programming languages will be used in each course?Programming languages are decided by the professor of each course. However, over the past few years, Python has been widely used.
Which courses are required for an MS in Data Science?The course curriculum for an MS in Data Science can be found on ourMaster’s Curriculum page.
What type of classes will be offered as electives?Pre-approved electives can be found on theMaster’s Curriculum page. Generally, any graduate-level course at NYU on data science-related disciplines (e.g. optimization, probability, statistics) or data science related domains (e.g. biology, economics, physics, business, sociology, urban science) are eligible. In addition, students with an interest in courses not on the pre-approved elective list may request approval to apply the course to the degree. The design of the program has 6 electives and 6 required courses so that students can pursue their interests in data science disciplines or in data science domains.
Will CPT or OPT be offered?Yes, CPT and OPT are options for Data Science students. CPT is “curricular practical training,” a program which allows international students to obtain paid internships for credit after the first year of the degree.
OPT is “optional practical training,” a program which allows international students to obtain paid internships without credit either during or after the degree. We are a STEM eligible program.
Is the program available to full-time employees and/or part-time students?Both full-time and part-time students are welcome.
Are international students accepted?NYU seeks talented students from every corner of the globe.
Who will be teaching?Instructors for required courses are from across all of the NYU schools.
How much linear algebra do I need to have taken?One undergraduate course is sufficient.
Are there different requirements for international students?For more information for international students interested in the MS in Data Science program, please visitthe NYU Graduate School of Arts and Science website.
What are the prerequisites for admission to the MS program?Please see ourMaster’s Admissions Requirements page.
How many courses should I plan to take each semester?The full-time program is designed to be 4 semesters. The suggested full-time workload is three 3-credit courses per semester totaling 9 credits per semester. We do not recommend more than 3 courses per semester, as most courses have both significant mathematical content and programming assignments.
Can I work full-time while taking classes?The suggested full-time program is 9 credits per semester. Because of the heavy workload, 9 credits will equal out to about 40 hours of work per week. Students should be able to work while taking classes, but due to the amount of work required for the program, we suggest taking 6 or less credits per semester if you have a full-time job.
Can test scores be received after the application deadline?Due to the extraordinary circumstances of COVID-19 we are allowing for official test scores to be received after the application due date for the Fall 2022 application cycle. Please note that you will be required to upload a copy of your unofficial scores no later than the announceddeadlines.
Is work experience required?While many of our students have work experience, it is not required.
If I am denied admission, can I apply again?Yes, you may apply again by submitting a new application and supplemental material.
I am rejected, can I receive feedback?Unfortunately, due to a high volume of applications, reviewers cannot provide feedback on why an application was rejected.
Can Data Science students pursue a dual degree?No, unfortunately, there are no dual data science degrees at this time. However, the data science curriculum allows students to take electives within various departments outside of Data Science.
Can you review my profile to let me know if I will be admitted?We do not provide pre-application reviews regarding a candidate’s viability. Please review the below links which should give you a general idea of how you compare to past successful applications:ApplicationsWhere do I mail official transcripts?Copies of your official transcripts should be uploaded with your application. If you are accepted, the Graduate School of Arts & Sciences will request a mailed copy of your transcripts. Please note that only electronic submissions will be accepted in the application.
I am having technical problems with the online application system – who should I contact?gsas.admissions@nyu.eduWhat is the application deadline?Please visit theNYU GSAS Data Science page.
I am very interested in the Data Science program, but I do not have a strong background in math. Can I still apply?A strong background in math is required – please seethe Admissions Requirements pagefor details to prerequisites).
What do I do if one my references can’t use the online recommendation system?Please review the Graduate School of Arts and Science’sFAQ sectionfor the policies regarding letters of recommendation.
Standardized TestingDo I need to take the GRE or GMAT to apply? If so, what scores will be accepted?We do not accept GMAT scores. Each applicant must submit his or her GRE scores. If you have not yet taken the GRE exam, visit theETS websiteto find more information on exam dates and registration.
What is the minimum cutoff for GRE, IELTS, and TOEFL?Many factors are taken into account in considering by the admissions committee. There is no minimum cutoff for standardized tests. However, for the IELTS, there is a recommended minimum band score of 7.0. For the TOEFL, there is a recommended minimum score of 100 on the internet-based test.
Is it possible to waive the TOEFL scores?The Graduate School requires applicants who are not native English speakers to submit official TOEFL or IELTS score results. The TOEFL/IELTS requirement is waived if your baccalaureate or master’s degree was (or will be) completed at an institution where the language of instruction is English.
What is the Center for Data Science School Code for the GRE and the TOEFL?The school code for the GRE and TOEFL is 2596.
FinancialHow much does the program cost?Tuition and fees for the current academic year can be found on theGraduate School of Arts and Science Tuition and Fees page.
Does NYU offer financial aid and/or scholarships?Please see ourFinancial Aid page.
Is financial aid available?Please seethe Graduate School of Arts and Science Financial Aid page. However, please note that the Center for Data Science does not participate in most of the fellowship and award programs offered by the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences.
Are paid research/teaching assistant positions available?Yes, it is possible and many students RA and TA for professors, but we don’t guarantee such opportunities for any given student.
MiscellaneousWhere else can I learn more about the application process?Please visit theGSAS Application Resource pagefor more FAQs.
I was accepted into the program, but would like to defer my admission. Is this possible?The Center for Data Science will not approve a request for deferral of admission. If an admitted student wishes to delay enrollment, it will be necessary to turn down the offer of admission and reapply for admission the following year. A completely new application will be required. The new application will be considered along with all other applications at that later time.
Are there any internships or volunteer opportunities in NYU Data Science?The NYU Center for Data Science helps to provide robust internship opportunities with business partners in the New York area, including some of the world’s largest companies working in data science, artificial intelligence and machine learning. Many of these companies are within walking distance of the campus.
How can I apply for an administrative position in the NYU Data Science department?Administrative positions available in Data Science will be posted onthe NYU Careers page.
Are Teaching Assistant (TA) or Research Assistant (RA) positions available for students enrolled in the program?We do not use the term “Teaching Assistant” but we do sometimes have grading and section leader positions available for qualified students. Research assistantships are not available to master’s students.
For further details about funding suggestions, please visit theNYU GSAS Financial Aid page.
What about other types of jobs?Browse available part-time and internship positions on theNYU Wasserman Center for Career Services page. Full-time NYU positions are listed atCareers at NYU page, although full-time students’ schedules may not accommodate full-time work as well. For more information:Graduate School Application Resource Center.
What if my visa is delayed or if I encounter issues securing a visa?All visa and immigration related questions should be directed to theNYU Office of Global Services.
©2022 NYU CDS 7th floor, 60 5th Ave, New York, NY, 10011NYU Center for Data Science
