old id = 3563
Affectiva Automotive AI for Occupant Experience Monitoring - Affectiva : Affectiva
1925
https://www.affectiva.com/product/affectiva-automotive-ai-for-occupant-monitoring

Quick Info100 Summer StreetFloor 19, Suite 1925Boston, MA 02110In Downtown BostonAffectiva Automotive AI for Occupant Experience MonitoringCars and the way we use them are changing. Also changing is what we expect of the overall transportation experience. Consumers need an in-cabin environment that is adaptive to their needs in the moment. To enable this, OEMs and Tier 1s need a deep understanding of what’s happening with the people in the vehicle: how are they reacting to the in-cabin environment and the operation of the vehicle? How does this information help build a brand experience that addresses frustrations and brings joy to occupants?Car manufacturers must understand and meet these consumer needs, as these needs evolve beyond optimal driving performance and safety features. Especially with advances in ridesharing, shared car ownership and the advent of robo-taxis, consumers are looking at what they can do in the car.
When considering a brand purchase, consumers may contemplate, “which car can make me the most productive? The most entertained? The most relaxed?” This concept also becomes increasingly relevant when looking ahead to the evolution of autonomous capabilities: how can the functionality of self driving cars address consumer pain points for an enjoyable and productive transportation experience?Occupant MonitoringAffectiva Automotive AIunderstands driver and passenger emotions, cognitive states, and reactions to the driving experience. In addition, it perceives how many passengers are in a vehicle, who they are, where they’re sitting, what they’re doing, what objects they are using, and how they’re interacting with each other and the vehicle systems. These insights will deliver an intelligent in-cabin environment that is responsive and adaptive to the needs of the people in it.
Affectiva Automotive AI can help car manufacturers revolutionize the transportation experience. Consider the following use cases that can be enabled with a deep understanding of occupant mood and reactions to the environment, and with insight into what they are doing in the vehicle.
Affectiva Launches Multi-Modal Automotive In-Cabin AI to Improve Road Safety and Accelerate AutonomyAffectiva and Nuance to Bring Emotional Intelligence to AI-Powered Automotive AssistantsNewsletter Sign UpPrivacy Overview
