old id = 4692
Sleep in the completely locked-in state (CLIS) in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis | SLEEP | Oxford Academic
2010
https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fsleep%2Fzsz185

Article ContentsSleep in the completely locked-in state (CLIS) in amyotrophic lateral sclerosisThese authors contributed equally.
Data collection.
Principal investigator of the project.
CiteAzim Malekshahi, Ujwal Chaudhary, Andres Jaramillo-Gonzalez, Alberto Lucas Luna, Aygul Rana, Alessandro Tonin, Niels Birbaumer, Steffen Gais, Sleep in the completely locked-in state (CLIS) in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis,Sleep, Volume 42, Issue 12, December 2019, zsz185,https://doi.org/10.1093/sleep/zsz185AbstractPersons in the completely locked-in state (CLIS) suffering from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) are deprived of many zeitgebers of the circadian rhythm: While cognitively intact, they are completely paralyzed, eyes mostly closed, with artificial ventilation and artificial nutrition, and social communication extremely restricted or absent. Polysomnographic recordings in eight patients in CLIS, however, revealed the presence of regular episodes of deep sleep during night time in all patients. It was also possible to distinguish an alpha-like state and a wake-like state. Classification of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep is difficult because of absent eye movements and absent muscular activity. Four out of eight patients did not show any sleep spindles. Those who have spindles also show K-complexes and thus regular phases of sleep stage 2. Thus, despite some irregularities, we found a surprisingly healthy sleep pattern in these patients.
The presence of circadian variation in EEG activity points to a conserved sleep-wake cycle in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients in completely locked-in state (CLIS). There are marked differences between these patients and healthy participants, e.g. a complete loss of sleep spindles in some patients and the presence of sinusoid, high-amplitude theta activity instead of alpha activity. Slow-wave generation, on the other hand, seems intact in all patients. Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep is present in at least some patients, but it cannot be ascertained in all patients. The existence of intact sleep in patients in CLIS is another important sign that their wakefulness is likewise intact. It also indicates that providing undisturbed sleep opportunity will be important for the patients’ mental well-being.
IntroductionThe sleep-wake cycle is a crucial component of neural and bodily development and restitution involved in a plethora of homeostatic processes [1]. Different exogenous zeitgebers, such as daylight, social stimulation, motor activity or food intake, synchronize the various central and peripheral endogenous oscillators [2–7] In the locked-in condition and the completely locked-in state (CLIS) [8], most of these zeitgebers are absent or attenuated due to complete immobility and absence of muscular activity, artificial respiration, artificial feeding and artificial lighting [9–12] Patients in CLIS suffering from advanced motor neuron diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), who have an inability to open or close their eyes voluntarily, have their eyes closed most of the day and during the night to avoid drying of the immobile eyeball and cornea. In some cases, the complete closure of the eyelids remains impossible, leading to corneal lesions due to extensive drying with little or no differentiated vision left. Artificial feeding and breathing through a tracheostoma impose an extreme regularity on the internal organ systems, impeding the differentiation between day and nighttime. Social stimulation is certainly more frequent during the day but 24-hour care entails multiple activities also during the night (suction of saliva, excrements, eye care, position changes to avoid decubitus, change of tubes and feeding devices, etc.). The reduction of active social interaction and the complete lack of (verbal or signing) communication further minimize the differences between daytime and nighttime stimulation. Muscular paralysis also dramatically reduces the amount of afferent proprioceptive inputs towards the spinal cord and brain. Patients are bedridden and completely motionless over months and years, except during short periods of passive position changes. Although effects of constant conditions on homeostatic and circadian processes and on sleep have been investigated in constant routine studies and forced desynchrony protocols [13], in CLIS patients who constantly live in a controlled environment, the effects on their circadian rhythm are largely unknown [14]. Although, the scientific literature is rich on circadian rhythm and sleep-wake cycle in healthy populations [15–19] and patients with other neurological disorders [14,20–25], there exists virtually no information about circadian rhythm and sleep-wake cycle in patients in the CLIS.
For brain-computer interface (BCI) communication with these patients, it is necessary to discriminate periods of sleep and wakefulness in the individual EEG. It has been argued that the main reason for decreased or random performance in BCI communication might be the lack of attention and the presence of micro sleep during the presentation of the questions [11]. In a study of one CLIS and two LIS patients over a whole year it has been shown that a reduced P300 amplitude during the BCI task predicted lower performance, again suggesting reduced wakefulness and attention as a major limiting factor for BCI applications in these severely compromised patients [26].
To our knowledge, the sleep pattern of only one patient from our lab shortly after the transition from the locked-in state to the CLIS has been reported [27]. An irregular sleep pattern with daytime episodes of slow-wave sleep disrupted slow-wave sleep during the night and irregular appearance of different sleep stages during day and night was reported in this patient. The overall slow-wave sleep duration was normal for the age of the patient. It is of clinical and theoretical importance to study sleep in a larger sample of CLIS patients. The presence of distinguishable sleep and wake periods in these patients would constitute another piece of evidence for their cognitive functioning. Undisturbed sleep could also serve to prevent depression and maintain sufficiently high quality of life in these patients [28].
Hence, to elucidate their sleep-wake cycle, we recorded sleep in eight CLIS patients. We will outline criteria, which can be used to delineate the sleep stages, and describe and discuss the sleep cycles of the individual patients. Already at this point we need to mention the main limitations of this research, which are dictated by the clinical condition: the absence of eye movements and of changes in muscular tone due to the complete paralysis complicate scoring of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. Mainly because of this limitation, it is impossible to label each 30-second epoch of the night with a sleep stage. We, therefore, refrain from presenting hypnograms and percentages of sleep stages, but only describe which sleep stages occur in a specific patient.
Materials and MethodsThe Internal Review Board of the Medical Faculty of the University of Tubingen approved the experiment reported in this study and the patients’ legal representatives gave written informed consent for the study with permission to publish the results. The study is in full compliance with the ethical practice of Medical Faculty of the University of Tubingen. The clinical trial registration number is ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT02980380.
PatientsThe details of patients 1, 3, and 4 are described in Ref. [11] as patients F, G, and W, respectively. The remaining patients are described below.
Patient 5 (male, 50 years old, CLIS) was diagnosed with bulbar sporadic ALS in May 2008, as locked-in in 2009, and as completely locked-in May 2010, based on the diagnosis of neurologists and on our recordings (see below and Ref. [11]). He has been artificially ventilated since September 2009, fed through a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube since October 2009, and is in home care. No communication with eye movements, other muscles, or assistive communication devices was possible since 2010.
Patient 6 (male, 38 years old, CLIS) was diagnosed with bulbar ALS in 2009. He lost speech and capability to move by 2010. He has been artificially ventilated since September 2010 and is in home care. No communication with eye movements, other muscles, or assistive communication devices was possible since 2012.
Patient 7 (female, 57 years old, CLIS) was diagnosed with Mills’ syndrome of ALS with atypical progression at the beginning of 2010. She lost speech and capability to walk by 2011. She has been fed through a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube since June 2010, artificially ventilated since June 2010, and was in home care until she passed away in 2017. She started using assistive communication devices employing eye movement for communication in 2011. Eye-tracker-based communication failed at the beginning of 2015. The family and caretakers communicated with her since the middle of 2015 based on her thumb-movements, which after a year became unreliable.
Patient 9 (male, 23 years old, CLIS) was diagnosed with juvenile ALS with FUS mutation heterozygote on Exon 14: c.1504delG, gene mutation diagnosed in 2013. He has been artificially ventilated since August 2014 and is in home care. He started communication using MyTobii eye-tracking device in January 2015. He was able to communicate with MyTobii until December 2015 after which the family members attempted to communicate by training him to move his facial muscles near the nose to answer “yes” but the response was unreliable. No communication was possible since June 2016.
Patient 10 (male, 25 years old, locked-in state on the verge of CLIS) was diagnosed with familial juvenile ALS with ALS 6-FUS gene mutation in December 2012. He was completely paralyzed within a year after diagnosis, has been artificially ventilated since November 2013, and is in home care. He was able to communicate with eye-tracking from early 2014 to August 2016 but was unable to use the eye-tracking device after the loss of eye control in August 2016. No communication with eye movements, other muscles, or assistive communication devices was possible since 2016.
In none of these patients, voluntary eye movement responses to questions were recorded in any of the recording sessions. None of these patients showed any brain disease unrelated to ALS. CLIS onset was on average 38 months after initial diagnosis, which corresponds to expectations [29]. The proportion of juvenile-onset ALS was higher in our sample than in the general population of ALS patients [30].
Sleep recordingSleep EEG was recorded consecutively for two nights from each patient, except patient 4 and 7 (one night only). The first recording was carried out in order to adapt the patients to the electrodes. The second night EEG, EMG, and EOG were recorded for later sleep scoring. As shown inTable 1, sleep EEG data was acquired for more than 12 hours for all the patients, except patient 4.
Summary of findings for each patient+: clear signs of sleep stage present; (+): some signs of sleep stage present; (uncertain): possible signs of sleep stage present; -: no sign of sleep stage present.
Summary of findings for each patient+: clear signs of sleep stage present; (+): some signs of sleep stage present; (uncertain): possible signs of sleep stage present; -: no sign of sleep stage present.
The sleep polysomnography was recorded with a multi-channel EEG amplifier (Brain Amp DC, Brain Products, Germany) from 11 Ag/AgCl passive electrodes mounted on a head cap. Six electrodes (F3, F4, C3, C4, O1, and O2) were used to acquire EEG signals, four electrodes were used to acquire the vertical and horizontal EOGs, and one electrode was used to acquire chin-EMG. EEG-channels were referenced to an electrode on the right mastoid and grounded to the electrode placed at the Fz location of the scalp. Electrode impedances were kept below 10 kΩ and the EEG signal was sampled at 500 Hz.
PreprocessingThe recorded EEG and EOG signals were low-pass filtered using a finite impulse response low-pass filter of 30 Hz. For the EMG, the signal was filtered with a 50 Hz notch filter.
Sleep scoringThe EEG of patients in CLIS is dissimilar in large extents to that of healthy participants. These patients show, e.g. regular high-amplitude oscillatory activity in the theta (4–8 Hz) frequency range for longer periods of time, which cannot be found in healthy participants. Moreover, they have no detectable eye movements during wakefulness and no muscle tone, due to their condition. Thus, the standard sleep-scoring criteria, particularly for REM sleep, have to be adapted to score the sleep stages from patients in CLIS. Still, initial visual inspection of the whole night EEG shows already obvious variations of EEG patterns over time. It can, therefore, be hypothesized that the states of arousal and consciousness also fluctuate throughout the night. Based on time of day and on interaction with the patient (movement artifacts), we had a starting point for a rough assumption of sleep and wakefulness: during the night, longer quiet periods without movement would have a higher probability of representing sleep than morning recordings and periods directly after movement (suction of saliva, repositioning of the patient). We then applied the criteria of Rechtschaffen and Kales [31] to the recordings to determine whether some features of sleep could be found. This scoring was performed visually on 30-s epochs. It resulted in the detection of a number of EEG patterns that generalized over patients, some of which resembled the classical sleep stages. Scoring was done by an experienced sleep scorer (S.G.) and discussed in detail among all authors. We describe the criteria that had to be adjusted as well as the criteria that could be applied directly in the results section.
Signal analysisPower spectra were computed using Welch’s method with a resolution of 0.5 Hz for each 30-second epoch for all EEG channels. Channels containing obvious artifacts were excluded from further analysis. Whole-night spectrograms were calculated based on the median of all artifact-free channels. The median was used to further suppress artifacts and unusually high or low power values. Spectrograms were normalized by subtracting the median and dividing by the value of the 75th quantile of each frequency, analogous to Z-standardization, in order to have comparable ranges. The scale of the spectrograms is, therefore, dimensionless. Additionally, for all patients, the power spectra of a period of quiet wakefulness is presented to show peaks in EEG power.
As the heartbeat was clearly reflected in the EMG trace of two patients (Pat. 1 and Pat. 5), we used these recordings to calculate the continuous heart rate. The 50 Hz notch-filtered EMG channel was band-pass filtered between 5 and 70 Hz using an IIR filter. Individual heart beats were detected as spikes in the signal. Spikes that were too large or too small were removed as outliers. Then, heart rate was calculated from the distance between spikes. Finally, outliers in heart rate were removed and the whole time series filtered with a 30-point moving average filter.
ResultsThree main observations could be made during visual sleep scoring: (1) All patients had cyclic changes in their brain activity throughout the recording in the sense that we found alternating periods with and without slow-wave activity. (2) The discrepancy to healthy sleep EEG differed between patients. (3) Some commonalities in EEG anomalies across patients could be found. Because we observed that each patient has his or her own idiosyncrasies in the sleep-wake cycle, the result of each patient will be described first in this section. Subsequently, we will describe common patterns between participants and suggest heuristics for the scoring of sleep in CLIS patients. Exemplary epochs for individual sleep stages and whole-night power spectrograms can be found for each patient in theSupplementary Material. Exemplary data for patient 9 is presented inFigure 1.
Normalized spectrogram (upper left) and segments of selected sleep epochs of patient 9. Yellow color in the spectrogram reflects higher than average activity in a frequency band; blue color signifies lower than average activity. Red lines on the spectrogram indicate epochs belonging to particular sleep stages. Twelve-second segments of these epochs are shown in the other panels. Here, vertical lines represent 1-s intervals. The EEG during active wakefulness (W[A]) is largely similar to that of healthy participants. EEG activity during inactive wakefulness (W[I]) is around 5 Hz, but resembles alpha activity rather than typical theta activity. Stage 2 sleep (S2) with spindles and K-complexes as well as slow-wave sleep (SWS) can be clearly discerned in this patient. Note the large eye movements during REM sleep (R), which the patient is unable to perform voluntarily during wakefulness. Recordings of the other patients are available in theSupplementary Material, following the same arrangement.
Normalized spectrogram (upper left) and segments of selected sleep epochs of patient 9. Yellow color in the spectrogram reflects higher than average activity in a frequency band; blue color signifies lower than average activity. Red lines on the spectrogram indicate epochs belonging to particular sleep stages. Twelve-second segments of these epochs are shown in the other panels. Here, vertical lines represent 1-s intervals. The EEG during active wakefulness (W[A]) is largely similar to that of healthy participants. EEG activity during inactive wakefulness (W[I]) is around 5 Hz, but resembles alpha activity rather than typical theta activity. Stage 2 sleep (S2) with spindles and K-complexes as well as slow-wave sleep (SWS) can be clearly discerned in this patient. Note the large eye movements during REM sleep (R), which the patient is unable to perform voluntarily during wakefulness. Recordings of the other patients are available in theSupplementary Material, following the same arrangement.
Patient 9This patient shows clear high amplitude slow waves during the night, starting at around 1:30 am (Figure 1). These waves are in shape and in their clustered occurrence indistinguishable from slow waves of healthy patients. In the spectrogram, they are visible as a strong <2 Hz band. For longer periods of up to 45 minutes, the criteria for slow-wave sleep (SWS), sleep stages 3 (S3) or S4 are reached. For about 1 hour before the onset of S3, individual slow waves (K-complexes) and sleep spindles can be found (S2). In-between periods of S2, epochs dominated by bursts of regular, sinusoidal EEG activity of 3–5 Hz with medium to high amplitude can be found. These bursts have varying length, typically between 5 and 20 seconds. Because of its regularity and the duration of bursts, this activity is strongly reminiscent of alpha activity (seeFigure 1, section W[I]). It also occurs for longer periods of several hours in the afternoon and in the evening before the first signs of S2. Although having theta band frequency, these waves have no similarity to the typical, irregular, sawtooth-shaped theta activity of healthy participants. Except for its frequency, this activity, therefore, in all other aspects seems to be equivalent to alpha activity in healthy patients. We, therefore, use this alpha-like activity to score periods of inactive, relaxed wakefulness (W[I]). Starting around 6:00 am, after signs of S2 have diminished, longer periods of low amplitude, high-frequency activity appear. Frequencies are dominated by beta-band activity, with a varying degree of intermixed irregular theta activity. Because of its similarity to typical wake activity and because of its strongest occurrence in the morning after sleep, we score this activity pattern as active wakefulness (W[A]). In the morning, this high-frequency activity is occasionally interrupted by 5- to 20-second periods of regular theta activity as described above (W[I]). In the afternoon, the pattern inverses and long periods of W[I] are interrupted by epochs of W[A].
Unrelated to S2 or SWS sleep phases, there are some epochs that show eye movements that resemble those typical for REM sleep. These occur mainly in the afternoon in the middle of longer periods of W[I], and are accompanied by a brief discontinuation of the alpha-like regular theta activity and appearance of irregular theta and beta waves. Although the timing of these periods is not typical for REM sleep, we suggest that these signs are indicative of REM sleep-like processes and score the corresponding epochs as REM sleep (R).
Patient 1This patient shows clear high amplitude slow waves (SWS) during the night, starting at around 2:00 am (Supplementary Figure S1). These waves are co-occurring with sinusoidal 4–7 Hz activity in some epochs. There are two more periods of SWS around 5:30 am and 7:30 am. There are no signs of sleep spindles throughout the night. The EEG in the evening before occurrence of SWS is dominated by the same regular, alpha-like 4–7 Hz (theta) activity (W[I]) as in patient 9, although with a lower amplitude. It is intermixed with high-frequency, low-amplitude activity (W[A]) to varying degrees. Interspersed throughout the recording are periods of dominant irregular theta activity during which REMs are manifest. Although the timing of these periods is not typical for REM sleep, we again suggest that these signs are indicative of REM sleep-like processes and score the corresponding epochs as R. Heart rate tendentially increases or reaches maxima over periods during which we did not detect any SWS (e.g. 10:30 pm – 02:00 am and 08:30 am – 10:30 am). During periods of SWS (marked by strong < 1.5 Hz activity) heart rate tendentially decreases.
Patient 3The EEG of this patient is dominated by regular, high-amplitude, alpha-like 4–7 Hz (theta) activity (W[I]), particularly in the evening and in some parts of the night (Supplementary Figure S2). Starting at 2:00 am, slow waves occur, first together with the alpha-like activity then replacing it more and more. There are several periods of SWS, alternating with periods of W[I]. In the morning, activity becomes more irregular (high-frequency beta and irregular theta activity), especially after intervals of (external) movement (W[A]); but still these periods contain amounts of alpha-like theta activity. After awakening and morning hygiene there is a 2-hour period of strong, continuous REM, accompanied mainly by irregular (sawtooth) theta activity and only little regular (sinusoidal) alpha-like theta activity. In this patient, the eye movement and EEG activity provide strong evidence for REM sleep. There is also evidence for a few sleep spindles in the morning after the period of morning hygiene and before REM sleep.
Patient 4We find two >1-hour periods of extensive SWS, at 11:00 pm and at 2:00 am (Supplementary Figure S3). During SWS, strong sleep spindle activity (12–14 Hz) is present. Strong spindle activity is also found during a 1-hour period around 4:00 am, which also presents K-complexes (S2). In-between SWS periods, there are periods dominated by 5- to 20-second bursts of regular, sinusoidal 2–4 Hz activity, which resemble the 4–7 Hz activity described in the patients above. These also occur in the evening, intermixed with high-frequency, low-amplitude activity. Because it shows all properties of alpha activity except the frequency range, we score these periods as W[I]. In the evening before sleep, the EEG is dominated by irregular theta and low-amplitude beta activity W[A]. In the morning starting around 6:00 am, we see similar irregular theta and low-amplitude beta activity, but accompanied by (mainly small and a few larger) REMs. Although difficult to discriminate from W[A], the quieter EMG (no external disturbance), the REMs, and the absence of alpha-like activity lead us to score R.
Patient 5This patient shows several periods of SWS between 10:00 pm and 5:00 am (Supplementary Figure S4). The slow waves are slower than usual and have a higher amplitude. In the evening before sleep and for 1 hour after the end of SWS in the morning, the EEG is dominated by 3–6 Hz alpha-like activity (W[I]). Starting at 6:00 am, the EEG becomes more mixed with irregular theta, beta, and only little alpha-like activity (W[A]). Throughout the day, periods of W[A] and W[I] alternate. In the afternoon at 05:00 pm, a period of clear REM sleep with strong REMs, irregular theta and low amplitude beta activity was found, which continued for >15 minutes until the end of the recording. No sleep spindles were found in this patient. Heart rate is minimal during the night period, during which strong <1.5 Hz activity is recorded (09:30 pm – 7:30 am). It increases in the morning during interaction with the patient.
Patient 6In patient 6, there are two clear periods of SWS between 4:30 am and 7:00 am (Supplementary Figure S5). In between these two periods, we find several quiet epochs of low-amplitude, high-frequency activity that contain a certain degree of small eye movements. Because they do not resemble periods of wakefulness in this patient, we label these epochs tentatively as uncertain R. The rest of the day alternates between periods of W[I] (mainly in the evening) and W[A] (more abundant in the morning), showing more or less alpha-like 2–4 Hz activity, respectively. Again, no sleep spindles were found.
Patient 7This patient shows about 1 hour of SWS with very slow, high-amplitude EEG around midnight (Supplementary Figure S6). Before this period, a few minutes of S2 sleep containing sleep spindles was found. This period is also represented with a yellow spot in the 12–15 Hz band in the spectrogram of this patient. The rest of the recording contains mainly mixed frequency activity in the 1–3 Hz, theta, and beta bands. The amount of low-frequency activity varies throughout the recording, probably reflecting W[I] and W[A]. However, these variations are only gradual, so that a clear distinction between these two stages is difficult in this patient. Moreover, the 1–3 Hz low-frequency activity is less regular and sinusoidal than the alpha-like activity of the previous patients. Although it lies in the delta band and could be taken for slow-wave activity, it occurs also during periods where caretakers interact with the patients, and it much faster than the patients SWS activity, which can be clearly delineated in the patient’s spectrogram. We, therefore, believe this activity corresponds to the alpha-like activity in the other patients. During an undisturbed period at the beginning of the night, we found irregular theta activity together with some REMs and an absence of 1–3 Hz activity. We score this as a brief period of R.
Patient 10The spectrogram of this patient shows three periods of SWS between 3:00 am and 7:00 am (Supplementary Figure S7). During these periods, very slow (<1 Hz) activity can be seen in the sleep recording. These slow waves have the typical shape of sleep slow waves. In the evening before 3:00 am, the EEG is dominated by strong 2–4 Hz activity, which, as in patient 7, can be distinguished from SWS. Because of its regular sinusoidal shape, we score it as alpha-like activity and W[I]. In the morning, alpha-like activity alternates with slightly faster regular and irregular theta activity, which we score as W[A]. During a period with only a minimum of 2–4 Hz activity, we see a few small eye movements that could represent REMs. We, therefore, score some epochs as uncertain R. Sleep spindles were not found.
The power spectra of channel C3 of all eight patients can be found inSupplementary Figure S8. The figure shows a single peak in the spectrum in most patients. This peak is not found in the alpha band, but in a lower range between 2 and 7 Hz depending on the patient. The individual alpha-like frequency band for each patient is shown inTable 1. Comparing all six recorded channels, we did not observe any obvious topography (e.g. anterior-posterior) of alpha-like activity across the scalp.
DiscussionPolysomnographic recordings in CLIS patients show that these patients have a circadian sleep-wake pattern. All patients show <1 Hz slow-wave activity during one or several periods during the night. In most patients, the dominant activity outside of SWS was a regular, sinusoidal 4–6 Hz or 2–4 Hz activity, which resembles alpha activity in its distribution and burst-like behavior. This inactive wakefulness could be discriminated from active wakefulness in most patients, with active wakefulness showing irregular, higher frequency activity. Sleep spindles were absent in half of the patients. REM sleep was clearly present in two patients and probably present in most. Impaired REM sleep and lack of sleep spindles were independent, as the two patients showing the strongest REM sleep did not present any sleep spindles.
Slow activity dominates the EEG of CLIS patients during sleep and wakefulness. The slow waves of SWS have their typical frequency in some patients, in others they appear to be distinctly slower. However, all patients have slow waves in the range below 1 Hz, which can be easily detected by visual scoring or automatic analysis in the EEG. The timing of this activity, which occurs mainly after midnight and before 6:00 am in the morning, and which represents the slowest activity for each patient, leaves little doubt, that this activity actually represents SWS. All patients thus showed one or more periods of clear S3 or S4 sleep. Consistent with expectations, in both patients for which heart rate data was available, heart rate was decreasing or minimal during periods scored as SWS. During the 12-hour section of the circadian rhythm that we have recorded, we found longer stretches with slow-wave activity, which were mostly split into several consecutive periods. Night-time periods with and without slow-wave activity did not differ systematically with regard to light or other stimulation, except that sometimes a period of slow-wave activity ended with EMG activation (patient being moved). Our findings speak to an astonishingly well-conserved circadian rhythm, at least within our period of observation. It is, however, possible that there are additional periods of sleep during daytime that we did not record in the present study. Moreover, there might be periods of light S2 sleep, which we have not detected because of the lack of sleep spindles in most patients.
There is, however, another type of slow activity, which can be confounded with SWS in more than half of the patients. Most of the recordings are dominated by a regular oscillation in the upper delta/lower theta range (2–7 Hz). Several reasons speak against this activity being sleep-related. First, it appears at all times of day throughout the recordings: more strongly in the evenings, but also in the mornings. It often continues throughout periods of interaction with the patient. Second, it is distinct from the slower <1 Hz oscillations, which occur during the night, and mostly disappear during these periods. Third, this oscillation has a regular, sinusoidal shape, occurs in 5- to 20-second bursts, and has a waxing and waning amplitude during these bursts. Its shape clearly distinguishes it from theta and delta activity, which is usually more sawtooth or rectangular shaped. In most patients, it is also reflected by a single, pronounced peak in the power spectrum. Apart from the lower frequency, it is therefore strongly reminiscent of periods of alpha, which occur during resting wakefulness with eyes closed in healthy participants.
CLIS patients have their eyes closed most of the time to prevent drying of the eyeballs. It could, therefore, be expected to see strong alpha oscillations, but none are found in the 8–12 Hz range in any patient. Previous studies in locked-in ALS patients also showed a significant reduction in the alpha band over the central electrodes [32]. Moreover, our observations confirm the observations of Hohmannet al. [33], who showed in two CLIS patients that alpha frequency activity has completely disappeared and shifted towards lower frequencies. We, therefore, hypothesize that the continuous alpha activity is gradually slowing in frequency throughout the progression of the disease, may be due to lack of sensory stimulation or overuse of alpha-generating circuitry. This, however, remains open for further investigation.
In fact, there are reports of “alpha coma” and dominant alpha-theta activity in locked-in patients that are not completely locked-in [34,35]. The alpha-like theta/delta oscillation might, therefore, serve as an indicator of absence of slow-wave sleep. In healthy participants, alpha activity serves, together with rolling eye movements, as an indicator of falling asleep (S1). No CLIS patient showed rolling eye movements. Because of the persistence of alpha-like activity, the impossibility to describe consistent and distinct features of wake EEG in these patients, and the lack of light S2 sleep in most patients, it was impossible to distinguish a transitory S1 sleep stage in CLIS patients. We have therefore described the state of continuous (>50% of an epoch) alpha-like activity as inactive wakefulness (W[I]). During most parts of the day, this stage alternates with periods of active wakefulness, which has faster more irregular activity with lower amplitudes.
Sleep spindles (11–17 Hz), are the hallmark of light S2 sleep. These were completely absent in four out of eight patients. The lack of sleep spindles mirrors the findings by Pavlovet al.
[36], who also found few or no spindles in most of their non-responsive (vegetative state) patients. It is yet unclear when and why sleep spindles cease to occur in these patients. As spindles have been linked to the reprocessing of new memories during sleep [37], one might speculate that the daily routine of the patients with lack of change or new information renders sleep spindles superfluous. It is conceivable that the frequency of spindle oscillations also slows with the progression of the disease, but we have not found any indication of such a slowing. In fact, in those patients with spindles, these had all typical characteristics of sleep spindles in healthy participants. K-complexes, which often have a higher frequency than full slow-waves, were difficult to delineate. The presence of high-amplitude delta and theta band activity during wakefulness prevents the clear definition of individual K-complexes. However, no periods resembling S2 sleep (low-amplitude activity with a few, clearly delineated high-amplitude waves) were found in patients that did not also show sleep spindles.
Scoring of REM sleep according to standard rules relies largely on eye movements and muscle tone changes. Although patients in CLIS cannot produce any voluntary eye movements or muscle contractions, we found strong REMs during sleep in two patients and rudimentary eye movements during sleep in another four patients. This finding indicates that voluntary and autonomous eye movement control can be independent in CLIS patients. REM sleep-like irregular theta activity with medium amplitude was present during these REM periods. Scoring of REM sleep by EEG alone, which is feasible by experienced scorers in healthy patients, was impossible in our patients. The EEG could only be used in conjunction with the eye movement signal, and confident judgments of REM sleep were only possible in a few patients. Heart rate, which was unfortunately available only in patients 1 and 5, might be an additional helpful parameter for scoring REM sleep. In both patients, heart rate during periods scored as REM sleep or potential REM sleep was higher than during periods scored as sleep, and variability of the heart rate was greater. Further studies should consider placing explicit ECG electrodes.
Although we did not find any increase in spectral power during REM sleep, we noticed a distinctive decline in 2–3 Hz activity in the spectrograms of those patients with strong REMs. We found similar periods of distinctly decreased power in this frequency band in most patients. Visual inspection of the EEG during these periods visually confirmed REM sleep-like theta activity with small deflections in the EOG trace that could not be accounted for other than by eye movements (e.g. no corresponding activity in the EEG traces, no movement artifacts). These eye movements are much smaller and fewer than those habitually seen in healthy participants, but still, as there are no other sources of artifacts in CLIS patients, they can be taken as signs of autonomous eye movement activity. We can thus confirm the presence of REM sleep in some CLIS patients and the presence of possible REM sleep in most. However, new rules for scoring REM sleep, perhaps based on spectral EEG power, should be developed to increase sleep scoring accuracy in these patients. The present data indicates that REM sleep seems to be uncoupled from the typical NREM-REM cycle and to occur at different times of the day. This pattern might be related to the lack of movement and structure in the daily routine of the patients or to an uncoupling of circadian and ultradian cycles. Comparison with other bed-ridden patients might illuminate this aspect of CLIS sleep.
The analysis of the nighttime EEG demonstrates that patients in CLIS with ALS show slow-wave sleep episodes comparable to the healthy aged population. The two younger patients (9 and 10), suffering from a genetically determined ALS, do not substantially differ from the older ALS patients. Overall, sleep is fragmented, as already noticed [27], in these completely inactive patients, which spend most of their time, some of them since more than 5 years, in a completely paralyzed state in their bed, with only some transfer to the wheelchair during daytime. This constant, mostly bedridden routine and closed eyes, weakening the influence of light as the most potent zeitgeber, might be one reason for the disruption of the NREM-REM cycle and the absence of some of the typical sleep signs. Further studies should include neuroimaging to allow a more mechanistic investigation of the relation between pathologic changes in the brain and in sleep. Still, the maintenance of SWS in all patients might be an important factor contributing to preserve the quality of life in patients in an advanced locked-in state. Undisturbed nighttime sleep should, therefore, be aimed at in CLIS patient care.
FundingThe work of the authors is supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, Kosellek) DFG BI 195/77-1, BMBF (German Ministry of Education and Research) 16SV7701 CoMiCon, LUMINOUS-H2020- FETOPEN-2014- 2015-RIA (686764), and Wyss Center for Bio and Neuroengineering, Geneva.
Conflict of interest statement.
None declared.
ReferencesJennettB, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatBoivinDB, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatHastingsMH, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatChalletE, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatMistlbergerRE, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatBell-PedersenD, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatGolombekDA, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatBauerG, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatBirbaumerN.
Google ScholarWorldCatChaudharyU, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatChaudharyU, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatChaudharyU, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatBlatterK, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatCologanV, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatCzeislerCA, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatCzeislerCA, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatVan SomerenEJ.
Google ScholarWorldCatDijkDJ,LockleySW.
Google ScholarWorldCatSaperCB, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatHulihanJFJr, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatIsonoM, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatGermainA, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatWulffK, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatVidenovicA, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatMusiekES, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatDe MassariD, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatSoekadarSR, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatRiemannD, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatChiòA, et al.
;Google ScholarWorldCatRaymondJ, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatRechtschaffenA,KalesA.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatMaiR, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatHohmannMR, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatJacomeDE, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatBragattiJA, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatPavlovYG, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatGaisS, et al.
Google ScholarWorldCatAuthor notesThese authors contributed equally.
Data collection.
Principal investigator of the project.
Supplementary dataCommentsEmail alertsMore on this topicRelated articles inRelated articles in PubMedCiting articles viaLatestMost ReadMost CitedLooking for your next opportunity?ConnectResourcesExploreOxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and education by publishing worldwideThis Feature Is Available To Subscribers OnlySign InorCreate an AccountThis PDF is available to Subscribers OnlyFor full access to this pdf, sign in to an existing account, or purchase an annual subscription.
