old id = 3795
Phantom Syllables in the English Alliterative Tradition | Modern Philology: Vol 110, No 4
1896
https://doi.org/10.1086%2F669478

Phantom Syllables in the English Alliterative TraditionYale UniversitySearch for more articles by this authorIn 1732, Richard Bentley made a surprising discovery concerning the scansion of Homeric verse. Students of epic meter had noticed that some phrases violated the rules of elision, as for example a recurrent epithet for Agamemnon:Tὸν δ’ ἠμϵίβϵτ’ ἔπϵιτα ἄναξ ἀνδρῶν Ἀγαμέμνων.
1Tὸν δ’ ἠμϵίβϵτ’ ἔπϵιτα ϝάναξ ἀνδρῶν Ἀγαμέμνων.
Homeric studies found itself on the horns of a dilemma. By the turn of the twentieth century, it was no longer possible to deny thatThe IliadandThe Odysseyhad been composed well after digamma disappeared from Ionic Greek. Yet, somehow, digamma still mattered for the meter. In 1934, Milman Parry, architect of the epoch-making oral-formulaic hypothesis, offered a new explanation for the phenomena that Bentley had brought to light.
7In Parry’s view, the metrical significance of digamma did not depend on the putative survival of [w] in speech. Nor did it suggest a wildly archaic pronunciation. Drawing on his research on formulae in oral poetry, Parry argued that the digamma remained metrically significant as a convenience to the poet ensconced in an oral tradition, who would otherwise have had to reinvent many epithets coined when [w] was still a part of Greek phonology. Citing analogues from Old English, Old Norse, and other early poetries, Parry held that the formulae with digamma indicate not a phonological reality but the conservatism of Homer’s formal inheritance.
8When in front of an audience familiar with a traditional system of versification that came equipped with fixed epithets, it was apparently acceptable to go on declaiming ἄναξ ἀνδρῶν as though one had said ϝάναξ ἀνδρῶν. The phrase remained metrical because it had once been metrical. Parry’s hypothesis did not require that the poets or their listeners be unusually well informed about the history of their own language, for the epithet itself encoded this information. The poet in such a case “committed a fault, which was scarcely a fault, since he and his hearers had been used to it from their earliest days.”9Under Parry’s analysis, the digamma hovered by its old haunts like a phantom, invisible but significant, extinct and yet peculiarly expressive of a communal history.
IIn recent years, scholars of Old and Middle English alliterative meter have produced convincing proofs that similar phantom syllables account for what had seemed like metrical irregularities—even if they do not always recognize that this is what they have done. In 1992, R. D. Fulk revamped Max Kaluza’s 1896 comments on a link between etymology and metrical resolution in Old English verse, marshaling “Kaluza’s law” as proof of an early date forBeowulf.
10More recently, Thomas Cable, Nicolay Yakovlev, and a group of scholars from the University of Bristol have independently come to congruent conclusions about the structure of the b-verse in Middle English alliterative poetry.
11In developing a coherent metrical model, each of the scholars found it expedient to assume the significance of final-e, even as the most authoritative grammars place the disappearance of final -ein the relevant dialects a century or so before the so-called Alliterative Revival began.
12The two subfields have thus reached different stages of argumentation on essentially the same topic. Whereas the Middle English scholars have only recently nailed down the metrical significance of final-e, Kaluza’s observations on resolution spent a century in a dusty corner of Anglo-Saxon studies, only to be broadcast anew, and in the form of a law, the centerpiece of a controversial argument for an eighth-centuryBeowulf. Although the Middle English metrists have hazarded hypotheses about the relationship between metrical and phonological final-e, the full implications of their consensus have yet to be determined. Conversely, Fulk’s work onBeowulf, even as it brings Kaluza’s findings to light, seems to have foreclosed speculation on their significance.
Carried out with the help of electronic concordances and graphing software, these often perspicacious metrical analyses tend toward notational abstraction. But medievalists interested in the entwined fates of poetry and language ignore meter at their peril. Tucked away in Fulk’s compendiousHistory of Old English Meter(1992), implicit in the conclusions drawn therein, is the premise that poetic meter is a reliable criterion for establishing absolute chronologies, that developments in verse form follow straightforwardly from developments in the spoken language. A metrical history of comparable scope and polemical density has yet to be written for the Middle English poems, but the seeds have been sown or, rather, the lines of battle have been drawn. It is a battle that must be fought on metrical grounds, for whatever one might like to say about the revivals, survivals, or deaths of poetic traditions, one must in any case confront a burgeoning cache of hard dataexcavated from the very stuff of metrical language and therefore not directly beholden to the standard accounts of linguistic change or dialectal variation.
At the outset, one must take care to separate meter from conjecture.
13Fulk’s demonstration of an early date forBeowulfproceeds with the certitude of one in possession of an arsenal of self-evident facts: “And so theBeowulfpoet’s observance of Kaluza’s law establishes aterminus ad quemfor the composition of the poem because it depends on the preservation of original quantities in final vowels with Indo-European and Germanic broken intonation: after these vowels were shortened, it was no longer possible to observe Kaluza’s law in many words.”14Beowulfscholars have called into question nearly every aspect of Fulk’s analysis.
15Nevertheless, the data that form the basis of his argument, while requiring some qualification, deserve the attention of Anglo-Saxonists. As Kaluza first suggested, in some metrical contexts, some Old English poems sometimes uphold a distinction between historically short and historically circumflex final syllables.
16Whether any poem may be said to recognize the distinction with regularity, or whether one poem’s rate of adherence to the “law” can be meaningfully compared with another’s, depends on the calibration of an astounding array of technical criteria. It is enough for now to remark that Kaluza’s insight explains too many apparent exceptions to be ignored. Without recourse to historical phonology, it is difficult to explain the distribution of some short and circumflex endings inBeowulf, for example:1.
136a morðbeala mare3149a modceare mændon2.
288a scearp scyldwiga2476a frome fyrdhwateKaluza’s law appeals to scholars because it calls on a linguistic fact to reinforce a favorite metrical thesis, Sievers’sFünftypensystem. Yet though it is delivered with the matter-of-factness of a lab report, one crucial component of Fulk’s argument has little to do with linguistic data. Fulk takes for granted that after the shortening of circumflex endings, it was “no longer possible to observe Kaluza’s law in many words.”18For those familiar with the diachronic/synchronic dichotomy foundational to historical linguistics, the proposition has the smack of logic.
19Since speakers normally know very little about past states of their own language, when a phonological distinction disappears, one might expect a metrical rule based on it to disappear straightaway. Yet, poetry being mysterious stuff, it is not at all clear that this is how things work in practice. Early composition is not the only plausible explanation for Kaluza verses.
20The argument for Kaluza’s law as a dating criterion concerns developments in poetic form, not language alone, and therefore it ought to be tested against what we know about poetic form. It is worth noting that Kaluza himself preferred to leave the question open, explaining that his hypothesis applied to a historically heavy ending that “perhaps still retained something of its original intonation.”21The stakes for Old English studies could not be higher. To specify the relationship between meter and language is necessarily to say a great deal about the character of the poetry. On this count, the metrical formalists have made their allegiances clear. Faith in the synchronicity of metrical and linguistic developments undergirds the entireHistory, so that, in spite of the title, Fulk frames his task in overwhelmingly phonological terms. He ultimately has the same aim as did Bentley so long ago: to reconcile the linguistic facts encoded in verse form with the standard phonological history, to discipline the two sets of data until they converge.
As for meter itself, Fulk accepts, with minimal modification, Alan Bliss’s elaboration of Sievers’s system. Reliance on Sievers entails a second major assumption about the development of the Old English poetic tradition. As Thomas Bredehoft observes, “rather than discussing changes to the metrical system itself, Fulk’sHistoryis largely concerned with describing phonological changes in the words which fill out Sievers-Bliss verses.”22If readers come to the work expecting a history of meter, they will leave with the sense that the deck has been stacked. The rigidity of the Sieversian framework ensures thatBeowulfand a handful of other poems will typify “classical” Old English verse. Other Old English poems are cast as the ill-starred progeny ofa tradition in rapid descent, guaranteed to look “late,” to be rife with unseemly “late developments.” The circularity of the approach should be evident. It is as though one wrote a general theory of harmony based on one’s favorite bits of Bach and then concluded that Mozart was a hack because he preferred different chords. Perhaps there is some measure of truth to Sievers’s implicit chronology of verse form. But there is no justice in its arrogance toward metrical developments.
23Inasmuch as the Sievers typology has done more than any other theory to set the terms of the study of Old English poetry, a reevaluation of the current interpretation of Kaluza’s law will ipso facto constitute a reevaluation of the Old English canon and the shape of early English verse history.
Whereas Old English metrists have made it their business to shuffleBeowulfever further into the Mercian (or is it Northumbrian?) yesteryear, Middle English metrists have sought to describe the verse form of an Alliterative Revival, the conscious resuscitation of a long-dead poetic tradition. They are accordingly discomfited when their results suggest otherwise. Having demonstrated the metrical significance of final -ein the Middle English alliterative long line, Hoyt Duggan notes, with some surprise, that his findings contradict Thorlac Turville-Petre’s influential thesis.
24Over the past few years, Cable, Yakovlev, and the Bristolians have each confirmed the “surprising fact” that Middle English alliterative verse requires final -ein certain metrical positions.
25One of the positions is the last syllable of the line. The rule may be illustrated by a survey of the closing words of the first ten lines ofSir Gawain and the Green Knight(ca. 1390):1.
Troye2.
askez3.
wroȝt4.
erthe5.
kynde6.
bicome7.
iles8.
swyþe9.
fyrst10.
hatThus, a major problem in fourteenth-century literary history emerges. Because most of the texts in question can be assigned relatively firm dates on nonmetrical grounds, Middle English scholars cannot sidestep the final -edilemma in the manner of Fulk and the formalists. Like a petulant sibling, metrical history refuses to be reconciled to linguistic history. On the one hand, the Revival poems cannot be referred to the period preceding the disappearance of final -efrom the Northern and Western dialects in which they were composed; on the other, it is unbelievable that any fourteenth-century poet, let alone a gaggle of them, could have researched the history of the language thoroughly enough to fabricate a meter that distinguishes betweenskinne(counts as monosyllabic, <ONskinn+ OEscinn) andsunne(counts as disyllabic, <OEsunne);tulk(monosyllabic, <ONtúlkr) andkirk(disyllabic, <ONkirkja); and so on. The aspiring forger would have had to familiarize himself with thousands of Early Middle English lemmata. Geoffrey Russom, for one, pronounces such a feat of antiquarianism impossible.
27Where we know poets to have attempted imitations of earlier meters, the results are stilted and boring by turns, nothing like the mellifluous assonance of aSir Gawain and the Green Knightor the machine-gun intensity of aPiers Plowman(ca. 1360–87).
28Quite accidentally, then, Middle English metrists have discovered a lag between verse history and linguistic history on the order of one hundred years. Along with Homer’s digamma and the other vestiges cited by Parry, final -ein alliterative verse shows that poetic meter does not always and everywhere mirror its contemporary linguistic landscape, as Sieversian formalists assume that it does.
29One tiny syllable has single-handedly invalidated the strong version of the Revival hypothesis. The dogma that “the fourteenth-century alliterative long line…does not develop in any traceable way from the Anglo-Saxon long line” has been debunked once and for all.
30In a recent review article, Cable confidently declares that “there had to have been some kind of evolutionary process” leading from classical Old English verse to the Revival poems.
31Suddenly, the history of alliterative poetry looks less like an embarrassing series of deaths and suppressions, a trough between two fleeting golden ages, and more like a single trajectory of serious verse craft. If twelfth- and thirteenth-century final -ecan appear vestigially in fourteenth-century poetry, one might inquire what English verse history would look like if Kaluza’s law turned out to be a similar conservatism.
IIThe work of Cable, Yakovlev, and the Bristolians suggests a continuous alliterative tradition stretching from the earliest Old English poetry through Lawman and on through the fourteenth century.
32The new metrical re sults cut against the grain of decades of skepticism about the fate of Old English verse and the origins of the Revival poems, skepticism formed inresponse to the romantic nationalism of earlier critics.
33With the suddenness of a scientific breakthrough, metrics has established what literary criticism was unwilling or unable to notice. The persistence of final -ein fourteenth-century alliterative meter contradicts Turville-Petre’s Revival hypothesis, which depends on his terse (and unsubstantiated) claim that “‘classical’ Old English verse died quickly after the Conquest.”34That it has taken so long for scholars to recognize the continuity of the alliterative tradition testifies to the gravitational pull of the two major spheres of power (Old and Middle) in the modern English department. So long as alliterative verse was defined in terms of its earliest and latest incarnations, it could not avoid seeming at odds with itself. Proponents of discontinuity tend to pose the issue in extreme terms. Absent a workable formal model, it is easy to doubt that any regular development could have led directly fromBeowulftoGawain.
Scholars on both sides of the Conquest have been content to consign Lawman and other Early Middle English poets to a three-century swathe of ruined poetry—poetry whose main characteristic seemed to be its stubborn insistence on breaking all of Sievers’s rules. The idea of a foolishly archaistic Lawman indirectly valorizes the study ofBeowulfandGawain, whose authors at least had the decency to stick to “Old” or “Middle” English. The conception of Lawman as the overambitious poet of a language in crisis provides a suitably uninspiring backdrop for medieval England’s literary masterpieces.
The metrists’ discoveries offer an occasion to reimagine the scene from the ground up. If metrical final -ein the fourteenth century is in itself a powerful enough datum to topple a disjunctive history of alliterative verse, and if it is convincing enough to be found thrice when no one was looking for it, then there is no need to interpret Kaluza’s law as an injunction to slideBeowulffurther away from the bulk of Old English poetry. LikeThe Battle of Maldon(ca. 991), which adheres to Kaluza’s law without fail,Beowulfmay well retain a metrical distinction that no longer had any phonological reality forpoet or audience. Of course, even vestiges have a shelf life. The phenomena described by Kaluza’s law gradually disappeared from the poetry, not as part of the disintegration of some monolithic tradition, but in the course of healthy, if irregular, evolution. Eleventh- and twelfth-century alliterative poetry is characterized by less reliance on resolution and greater divergence of a-verse from b-verse.
35Then comes Lawman, who pushed the boundaries of literary form in his own day—a circumstance that has ironically led to his dismissal at the hands of scholars accustomed to the more familiar rhythms of Old or Middle English alliterative poetry. Next come one hundred years of silence, much pondered and much mourned. Then the alliterative tradition springs to life again, looking for all the world as though it had never died. Metrical final -eproves that, in fact, it had never died.
There are at least two good reasons not to resort to a lost oral tradition, that bugbear of Revival theories, to explain the survival of alliterative verse from the Middle EnglishPhysiologus(ca. 1250) toWilliam of Palerne(ca. 1350).
36On the one hand, fromCædmon’s Hymn(ca. 685) onward, alliterative poetry has always been oral and literary at once, a “visible song,” so that the proposition that it retreated from the page to the air founders on its own false binary.
37On the other hand, it is not hard to multiply reasons for the neglect or even suppression of writing in English during the first three centuries of the Norman overlordship. Metrical final -esuggests that the gap in the manuscript record bears witness to a rupture in social history, not verse history. A literary tradition is no less literary for failing to make it through the years and the fires, not to mention the political turmoil of its own time. The Revival poems can certainly lay claim to thematic and rhetorical innovation, but metrically speaking they consist of the same old English stuff. While the resurgence of English poetry in the mid-fourteenth century no doubt signals the start of a new chapter in the social history of England, it is now difficult to deny that Langland and theGawainpoet inherited some 750 years’ worth of uninterrupted developments in verse form—upward of a millennium, perhaps, forCædmon’s Hymnitself did not come from nowhere. In comparison, the pentameter tradition, inaugurated by Chaucer in the last quarter of the fourteenth century and more or less passé by the mid-twentieth, almost seems like a fad.
Inasmuch as it checks both the overexuberance of Middle English scholars, who are justifiably proud of their poems, and the formalist myopia of the Sieversian scheme, the version of alliterative verse history outlined above ought to be considered on its own merits. But the persistence of phonological vestiges throughout the tradition offers an especially apt metaphor for the nature of the developments and the character of the poetry. There is every indication that the preservation of archaic sounds was an integral part of the evolution of alliterative poetry. Like a language riddled with archaisms, at each stage of its development, alliterative meter contained a part of its own history, preserving outmoded forms for the rather sensible reason that there existed no suitable substitutes. Alliterative meter has an elasticity, a kind of passive memory. By scoring language into metrical form over and over again, it remembers the difference between short and circumflex, final -eand [Ø], long after speakers have forgotten. While a reanalysis of the transition from Old to Middle English alliterative meter has the salutary result of recuperating an avant-garde Lawman and a dynamic Early Middle English poetic corpus, final -eand Kaluza’s law point to a far more conservative tradition than anyone has supposed.
38As the metrists discovered in the course of their inquiries, the key to uncovering vestiges lies in the language, not the orthography.
39Whether a scribe writesskinnorskinneis of no consequence to the metrical line, which was composed in words, not in spellings. So meter is important in a second sense: it is often the only reliable way to choose among variant readings. Old English editors already emendmetri causa, and now Middle English scholars can, too.
40From Cædmon toGawain, orthography tells one story and meter quite another. In light of the massive changes that English underwent from 650 to 1550 CE, it is remarkable that alliterative poetry should have been able to preserve such particulars as the medial caesura, stress on the final word of the line, and a general system of mapping prosodic stress onto metrical stress.
41The “metrical developments” described in different ways by Duggan, Cable, Fulk, Yakovlev, and the Bristolians are better understood as changes in the way a free-flowing linguistic history is fitted to a conservative metrical establishment.
42It is not that the meter changes to accommodate the language—on the contrary. If the rule requiring a schwa at the end of the alliterative long line had disappeared along with historical -e, one would expect to find monosyllables likewatzandborȝat line end. As it happens, they almost never appear there. Similarly, in the case of digamma in Homer, it is more logical to assume a conservative phonology than to posit a host of new rules for elision and hiatus that apply only to words that had lost a digamma. While the words that fill out the metrical positions are in constant flux, the meter rarely pauses to adjust its formal requirements, giving rise to “a fault, which was scarcely a fault,” a metrical exception that is tolerated because it results from a change in language, not verse form. Meter is constantly falling behind the spoken language, harkening back to a (possibly fabricated) originary moment of natural meter, when linguistic and metrical forms were entirely commensurate. Taking Kaluza’s law as an example, the process might be schematized as follows:1.
Before sound change: rules for metrical resolution obtain, and apply to all words, which have either short or circumflex endings. Verses likeBeowulf2563agod guðcyning(long ending: suspension of resolution, four positions) are metrical, while verses like *god guðwine(short ending: resolution occurs, four-position minimum not met) are unmetrical.
2.
After sound change: the distinction between short and circumflex endings disappears, but the rules for metrical resolution persist. Words scan on the basis of their original values. Verses likegod guðcyningare still metrical, while verses like *god guðwineare still unmetrical.
3.
Long after sound change: the vestigial metrical patterns from the second stage are themselves reinterpreted as a new norm. The distinction between short and circumflex endings ceases to be metrically significant. Verses likegod guðcyningand verses like *god guðwineare both metrical.
Under such a scheme, genuine metrical developments would take centuries to crystallize, and this is exactly what the evidence of the extant poems suggests.
43Alliterative meter was built to last. It was founded on certain phonological distinctions, and it did not let their disappearance impede its survival. It is true in point of fact, but somewhat misleading, to say as Yakovlev does that metrical change can be explained by reference to language change.
44While Yakovlev shows that metrical developments in the alliterative tradition recapitulate developments in phonology and grammar to a greater extent than has been recognized, meter follows phonology only after a long flex period, represented above by the second stage. The point matters little to a retrospective reconstruction, but it must have mattered a great deal to poets and audiences. For the purposes of meter, and within the bounds of the flex period, the stability of metrical rules trumps the exigency of molding linguistic matter into metered verse. This explains why the Old and Middle English alliterative poems seem so much more dissimilar than they really are. At any given moment in its development, alliterative meter was reacting to an archaic phonology, itself likely a mishmash of past forms, which remained invisible both to historical linguistics and in the orthography. The key to reading the hidden history of the metrical establishment lies in the archaic sounds that lend it staying power. Who knows how many dead old sounds in the poetry still escape notice? While awaiting further discoveries, one is free to speculate that vestiges may have been the very essence of alliterative meter, that invisible-e’s and silent circumflexes, in their quiet way, bound together a cherished tradition.
Without a native informant, it is difficult to determine the extent to which the difference betweenguðcyningandguðwine, or betweenskinneandsunne, was explicit in the minds of poets, readers, or listeners. Within the context of a verse history, the question of performance does not arise.
45One can only glean the shape of a verse form, not of composition or recitation. The minimal statement is rather impersonal: consciously or unconsciously, the Revival poets upheld a distinction between two classes of words, one with an etymological form ending in schwa, the other with no ending or a nonschwa ending. It is unsatisfying merely to tabulate the metrical facts. One really wants a pattern of poetic transmission, a means of measuring archaism and innovation. If poets did recognize or intuit the history of their own meter, one should not expect this recognition to take a form commensurate with the vocabulary of modern linguistics. To look for archaisms on the level of the “prefix” or the “morpheme” is always, in a sense, to be looking in the wrong place.
In this matter, it is easier to discard bad conclusions than to draw good ones. For example, English alliterative poetry is in some important respects not analogous to Homer as Parry conceives of him. Parry’s analysis of digamma does not quite jibe with the evidence of fourteenth-century final -e, which is not restricted to set formulaic phrases. The cause of the persistence of final -ein alliterative meter from generation to generation, even after its extinction in the spoken language, must have been both stronger and more general than “formulaic tradition.” While Anglo-Saxonists have achieved a modus vivendi with Francis Magoun’s modification of Parry’s oral-formulaic hypothesis, it is hotly contested whether it makes sense to speak of “formulae” in Middle English poetry.
46Behind closed doors, many Middle English scholars might agree with Derek Pearsall’s judgment that oral tradition “is inevitably ‘low’ and inevitably makes wretched what it touches.”47Everyone agrees, in any case, that neither Old nor Middle English verse is as purely oral as Parry considered Homer to be. The applicability of Parry’s interpretation to alliterative meter therefore indicates either an oral aspect of an increasingly literary tradition or else the broader implications of the original hypothesis. Either Middle English verse owes a larger debt to oral tradition than most scholars are willing to allow, or Parry unwittingly pinpointed a metrical phenomenon that could and did function in a highly literate culture. The two possibilities are not mutually exclusive. Ultimately, the problem lies in Parry’s rigid dichotomy between orality and literacy. The alliterative tradition has it both ways, and metrical vestige may have been only one of a number of subtle mechanisms that propelled the craft of the scop into the literary future. It is easy to imagine the interdependence of Kaluza’s law, the Sievers types, and the whole system of traditional epithets. Most of the short-ending second compound elements relevant to Kaluza’s law are nouns denoting objects or ideas (-bealo, -gripe, -gryre, -searo, and so forth), while the circumflex- or consonant-ending elements are nouns or adjectives denoting persons or monsters (-berend, -cwida, -cyning, -floga, and so forth).
48The old distinction between short and circumflex endings may have continued to function as a convenient means of coining metrically agreeable epithets.
The story of alliterative poetry is neither one of decay and neglect nor of the inevitable triumph of a language or a culture. At each moment, poets must have had access to an array of metrical attitudes ranging from the avant-garde to the nostalgic, full of sounds newfangled, familiar, outdated, and all but forgotten. Future scholarship on alliterative verse would do well to attend to the poetry’s motley meter, built of past language states but not reducible to any one of them; in constant development but never caught up with the times; forever at play with invisible friends, old sounds that had disappeared without going obsolete.
NotesI am grateful to Roberta Frank and Ian Cornelius for commenting on earlier drafts of this article, and to the two anonymous readers ofModern Philologyfor offering a wealth of suggestions for its improvement.
1“Then Agamemnon, ruler of men, responded” (Iliad1.172, inIliad: Books I–XII, ed. D. B. Monro, 5th ed. [Oxford: Clarendon, 1971]). All translations are my own unless otherwise noted.
2For a general introduction to Homeric scansion, see Joint Association of Classical Teachers,Reading Greek: Grammar and Exercises, 2nd ed. (Cambridge University Press, 2007), 362–68 and 370; and Deborah Steiner, ed.,Homer: Odyssey, Books XVII and XVIII(Cambridge University Press, 2010), 37–43.
3Richard Bentley’s thoughts on digamma first appeared inHomeri Ilias, vol. 2, ed. Samuel Clarke (London, 1740), 146n. Having annotated his copy ofPoetae Graeci principes, ed. Henricus Stephanus, 2 vols. (Geneva, 1566), Bentley lent it to Christian Gottlob Heyne, who scattered some of Bentley’s musings on digamma throughout hisHomeri carmina(Leipzig, 1802). See also R. C. Jebb,Bentley(London, 1882), 149–53; and Ulrich von Wilamowitz-Möllendorff,Geschichte der Philologie, Nachwort and index by Albert Henrichs (1921; Stuttgart: Teubner, 1998), 36–37.
4Digamma also dropped out word-medially, which explains why certain short vowels scan long in Homer; see Martin West, “Homer’s Meter,” inA New Companion to Homer, ed. Ian Morris and Barry Powell (Leiden: Brill, 1997), 227. For a list of words in Homer that scan on the basis of etymological forms containing digamma, see R. C. Jebb,Homer: An Introduction to the Iliad and the Odyssey(Glasgow, 1887), 189–91.
5James Henry Monk,The Life of Richard Bentley, vol. 2 (London, 1833), 366.
6West, “Homer’s Meter,” 227.
7Milman Parry, “The Traces of the Digamma in Ionic and Lesbian Greek,”Language10 (1934): 130–44.
8Ibid., 131. For similar vestiges in Finnish and Estonian poetries, see Kaarle Krohn,Kalevalastudien(Helsinki: Academia Scientiarum Fennica, 1924), 44 and 56–57. To this list may be added the metrical archaisms in Old English and Old Norse treated in Geoffrey Russom,“Beowulf” and Old Germanic Metre(Cambridge University Press, 1998), 60–63.
9Parry, “Traces,” 134.
10Max Kaluza, “Zur Betonungs- und Verslehre des Altenglischen,” inFestschrift zum siebzigsten Geburtstage Oskar Schade(Königsberg, 1896), 101–34, andEnglische Metrik in historischer Entwicklung dargestellt(Berlin: Felber, 1909), 57–59; highlighted by Alan J. Bliss,The Metre of “Beowulf,”rev. ed. (Oxford: Blackwell, 1967), 31 n. 1; then picked up by R. D. Fulk,A History of Old English Meter(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1992), 153–68 and 348–51. Kaluza’s work, like Bliss’s, was based on the metrical theory of Eduard Sievers,Altgermanische Metrik(Halle, 1893), 127–28, “Zur Rhythmik des germanischen Alliterationsverses,”Beiträge zur Geschichte der deutschen Sprache und Literatur10 (1885): 209–314 and 451–545, and “Old Germanic Metrics and Old English Metrics,” trans. Gawaina D. Luster, inEssential Articles for the Study of Old English Poetry, ed. J. B. Bessinger Jr. and S. J. Kahrl (Hamden, CT: Archon, 1968), 267–88.
11The conversation began with Hoyt Duggan, “The Shape of the B-Verse in Middle English Alliterative Poetry,”Studies in the Age of Chaucer8 (1986): 73–105, “Notes toward a Theory of Langland’s Meter,”Yearbook of Langland Studies1 (1987): 41–70, “Final -eand the Rhythmic Structure of the B-Verse in Middle English Alliterative Poetry,”Modern Philology86 (1988): 119–45, “Langland’s Dialect and Final -e,”Studies in the Age of Chaucer12 (1990): 157–91, and “The Role and Distribution of -lyAdverbs in Middle English Alliterative Verse,” inLoyal Letters: Studies on Mediaeval Alliterative Poetry and Prose, ed. L. A. J. R. Houwen and A. A. MacDonald (Groningen: Forsten, 1994), 131–54; Thomas Cable, “Middle English Meter and Its Theoretical Implications,”Yearbook of Langland Studies2 (1988): 47–69, “Standards from the Past: The Conservative Syllable Structure of the Alliterative Revival,”Tennessee Studies in Literature31 (1989): 42–56, andThe English Alliterative Tradition(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1991), 66–84. The more recent discoveries appear in Judith Jefferson and Ad Putter, “The Distribution of Infinitives in -eand -enin Some Middle English Alliterative Poems,”Medium Ævum74 (2005): 221–47; Ad Putter, Judith Jefferson, and Myra Stokes,Studies in the Metre of Alliterative Verse(Oxford: Society for the Study of Medieval Languages and Literatures, 2007), 19–118; and Nicolay Yakovlev, “The Development of Alliterative Metre from Old to Middle English” (PhD diss., University of Oxford, 2008), “On Final -ein the B-Verses ofSir Gawain and the Green Knight,” inApproaches to the Metres of Alliterative Verse, ed. Judith Jefferson and Ad Putter (University of Leeds Press, 2009), 135–57, and “Prosodic Restrictions on the Short Dip in Late Middle English Alliterative Verse,”Yearbook of Langland Studies23 (2009): 217–42. Overviews are Thomas Cable, “Progress in Middle English Alliterative Metrics,”Yearbook of Langland Studies23 (2009): 243–64; and Kristin Lynn Cole, “The Destruction of Troy’s Different Rules: The Alliterative Revival and the Alliterative Tradition,”Journal of English and Germanic Philology109 (2010): 162–64.
12Duggan, “Final -e,” 119–20; and Donka Minkova,The History of Final Vowels in English: The Sound of Muting(Berlin: de Gruyter, 1991).
13On fact and theory in theFünftypensystem, see Thomas Cable, “Metrical Style as Evidence for the Date ofBeowulf,” inThe Dating of “Beowulf,”ed. Colin Chase (University of Toronto Press, 1981), 77–78. On the problems attendant upon linguistic-metrical testing, see Ashley Crandell Amos,Linguistic Means of Determining the Dates of Old English Literary Texts(Cambridge, MA: Medieval Academy of America, 1980).
14Fulk,History, 389.
15Metrists disagree about the causes, extent, and duration of Kaluza’s law. See Roberta Frank, “A Scandal in Toronto:The Dating of ‘Beowulf ’a Quarter Century on,”Speculum82 (2007): 850–56. I characterize the law as a morphological-semantic distinction with no bearing on the date ofBeowulfin “A Semantic Replacement for Kaluza’s Law inBeowulf,”English Studies93 (2012): 891–96.
16Fulk,History, 419–25. In another article, Fulk mentions in passing what should be considered a significant stumbling block to using Kaluza’s law as a dating criterion: “It is by no means impossible that certain of the etymologically circumflected vowels retained length into the eleventh century, notably the low vowel -a” (“Old English Meter and Oral Tradition: Three Issues Bearing on Poetic Chronology,”Journal of English and Germanic Philology106 [2007]: 324).
17Sievers,Altgermanische Metrik, 127–28. See also Bliss,Metre, 27–53; Benjamin H. Carroll Jr., “Metrical Resolution in Old English,”Journal of English and Germanic Philology92 (1993): 167–78; and Robert P. Stockwell and Donka Minkova, “Old English Metrics and the Phonology of Resolution,” inGermanic Studies in Honor of Anatoly Liberman, ed. Kurt Gustav Goblirsch, Martha Berryman Mayou, and Marvin Taylor (Odense University Press, 1997), 389–406. A dissenting view is Wolfgang Obst,Der Rhythmus des Beowulf: Eine Akzent- und Takttheorie(Heidelberg: Winter, 1987), 19–24.
18In a later article, Fulk revises his position, acknowledging the conservative nature of poetic language. Yet he claims to be able to distinguish between a “late” poet such as Cynewulf, who “has lost the key to understanding [poetic formulas’] structure” (Fulk, “Old English Meter,” 312), and an “early” poet such as theBeowulfpoet, who was “far more knowledgeable about archaisms in the language of verse” (311). The decisive criterion is whether the archaic material is restricted to “formulaic diction” (309, 311, and 322). The present article raises two general objections to this kind of claim about poetic chronology. First, at any given point in the development of alliterative poetry, a range of metrical styles must have been possible, from the conservative to the experimental, so that even if one could demonstrate a series of metrical differences between, say,BeowulfandJuliana—and even if those differences could be mapped cleanly onto datable linguistic changes—it still would not establish a relative chronology of the two poems. Second, final -ein Middle English poetry shows that the preservation of archaic sounds need not be restricted to traditional formulae, but may apply wholesale to certain metrical contexts.
19Ferdinand de Saussure,Course in General Linguistics, ed. Charles Bally and Albert Sechehaye, trans. Wade Baskin (New York: Philosophical Library, 1959).
20Roberta Frank wonders if perhaps “the verse typemorðorbealo magaacted…as a generic signal, a ‘ye olde’ sign advertising the shard, the ruin, the blurred hieroglyph, an embodiment of the classical high style” (“Scandal,” 859). Compare B. R. Hutcheson,Old English Poetic Metre(Cambridge: Brewer, 1995), 89–94, and “Kaluza’s Law, the Dating ofBeowulf, and the Old English Poetic Tradition,”Journal of English and Germanic Philology103 (2004): 318–22. Fulk himself cites a conservative poetic tradition as a possible explanation for Kaluza verses in some Old English poems; see Fulk,History, 165, and “Old English Meter,” 317–23.
21“Vielleicht noch etwas von ihrem alten Eigenton bewahrt hatte” (Kaluza,Englische Metrik, 58). Kaluza did countBeowulf“in der älteren Dichtung” (in the older poetry) (58), but not, evidently, for Fulk’s reasons.
22Thomas Bredehoft,Early English Metre(University of Toronto Press, 2005), 7.
23“The assertion that the later poetry can be effectively compared to the earlier, or that later poets were, in fact,tryingto compose verse under the same rules as earlier poets is deeply problematic. The reality is not that the poetic tradition was rigid, but rather that Sievers-Bliss formalism is rigid” (ibid., 7).
24“It is very difficult to account for the metrical evidence discussed above without reference to a very long tradition of composition in essentially this form” (Duggan, “Final -e,” 145). Contrast Thorlac Turville-Petre,The Alliterative Revival(Cambridge: Brewer, 1977).
25Cable titled the section of his book that treats final -e“Surprising Facts” (English Alliterative Tradition, 66), an allusion (noted on 168) to Charles Peirce’s description of logical abduction. Hoyt Duggan remains the lone voice of dissent on the issue. In a recent article, Duggan makes the final dip optional: see “The End of the Line,” inMedieval Alliterative Poetry: Essays in Honour of Thorlac Turville-Petre, ed. John A. Burrow and Hoyt Duggan (Dublin: Four Courts, 2010), 69. In consideration of the metrical evidence adduced by Cable, Yakovlev, and the Bristolians, respectively, Duggan’s view is untenable.
26There are few exceptions: Cable,English Alliterative Tradition, 70–73. The other context in which the restriction applies is a “short medial dip,” i.e., a single unstressed syllable that comes between the two lifts of the b-verse. See Yakovlev, “Prosodic Restrictions.”27“Learning [alliterative meter] would have posed two major problems, since the verse patterns had remained quite diverse while becoming more artificial. It is difficult to imagine how anything like this meter could have been invented or learned independently of tradition” (Geoffrey Russom, “The Evolution of Middle English Alliterative Meter,” inStudies in the History of the English Language II: Unfolding Conversations, ed. Anne Curzan and Kimberly Emmons [Berlin: de Gruyter, 2004], 299). Compare Yakovlev, “Development,” 285–87 and 293–95.
28Under this head should be grouped the doddering verses of Hoccleve and Lydgate, wrought in imitation of Chaucer, as well as the many forgettable poets treated in Derek Attridge,Well-Weighed Syllables: Elizabethan Verse in Classical Metres(Cambridge University Press, 1974), esp. 129–35. Though it conforms in large part to the new metrical theories,Piers Plowmanis sometimes excluded from the core of Revival poems due to apparent idiosyncrasies; see Turville-Petre,Alliterative Revival, 58–59; Hoyt Duggan, “Notes on the Metre ofPiers Plowman: Twenty Years on,” in Jefferson and Putter,Approaches, 159–86, esp. 169; Yakovlev, “Development,” 25; and Macklin Smith, “Langland’s Unruly Caesura,”Yearbook of Langland Studies22 (2008): 57–101, and “Langland’s Alliterative Line(s),”Yearbook of Langland Studies23 (2009): 163–216. But see Duggan, “Notes toward” (contra his later opinions); Kristin Lynn Cole, “Rum, Ram, Ruf, and Rym: Middle English Alliterative Meters” (PhD diss., University of Texas at Austin, 2007), 29–73; and John A. Burrow, “The Endings of Lines in ‘Piers Plowman’ B,”Notes and Queries59 (2012): 316–20.
29Donka Minkova makes the same point from the perspective of the linguist: “The blanket acceptance of metrical distributional facts as realistic and incontrovertible testimony of prosodic relations is problematic” (“The Credibility of Pseudo-Alfred: Prosodic Insights into Post-Conquest Mongrel Meter,”Modern Philology94 [1997]: 441).
30Christine Chism,Alliterative Revivals(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2002), 16. Ralph Hanna III likewise speaks of “repeated showings that the ME verse displays no continuity with OE poetry” (“Defining Middle English Alliterative Poetry,” inThe Endless Knot: Essays on Old and Middle English in Honor of Marie Borroff, ed. M. Teresa Tavormina and R.F. Yeager [Cambridge: Brewer, 1995], 43).
31Cable, “Progress,” 264. Yakovlev traces this evolutionary process in fascinating detail (“Development”).
32Another important contribution in the same vein is Donka Minkova, “Diagnostics of Metricality in Middle English Alliterative Verse,” in Jefferson and Putter,Approaches, 77–113. Unrhymed alliterative poems continued to be written into the sixteenth century. The latest alliterative poem known to me appears in theWhole Prophesie of Scotland…(London[?], 1603) asThe Prophesie of Gildas, including probable references to the Acts of Supremacy (1534).
33Israel Gollancz, “The Middle Ages in the Lineage of English Poetry,” inMediæval Contributions to Modern Civilisation: A Series of Lectures Delivered at King’s College, University of London, ed. F. J. C. Hearnshaw (London: Harrap, 1921), 174–89; J. P. Oakden,Alliterative Poetry in Middle English: The Dialectal and Metrical Survey(Manchester University Press, 1930), 131–52; R. W. Chambers,On the Continuity of English Prose from Alfred to More and His School, EETS, o.s., 191A (London: Oxford University Press, 1937); R. M. Wilson,The Lost Literature of Medieval England(London: Methuen, 1952); and C. L. Wrenn, “On the Continuity of English Poetry,”Anglia76 (1958): 41–59. Contrast Turville-Petre,Alliterative Revival, 15–16 and 22. For an overview of the Revival debate, see Chism,Alliterative Revivals, 16–40.
34Turville-Petre,Alliterative Revival, 9 and 17.
35Cable,English Alliterative Tradition, 85–113.
36The ten alliterating lines quoted in Richard Rolle’sEgo dormio(ca. 1340), beginning “Alle perisches and passes” (Digital Index of Middle English Verse,http://www.dimev.net,no. 357), scan as alliterative verse and predateWilliam of Palerne. TheConflict of Wit and Willdates from before “the middle or the second quarter of the fourteenth century,” when its unique manuscript fragments were copied (A. I. Doyle, “The Manuscripts,” inMiddle English Alliterative Poetry and Its Literary Background: Seven Essays, ed. David Lawton [Cambridge: Brewer, 1982], 91), and so may predateWilliam of Palerneas well. The alliterative epitaph beginning “Her lis arfaxat” may date near the time it was copied (1274–91), further shrinking the apparent gap. See Oliver S. Pickering, “An Early Middle English Verse Inscription from Shrewsbury,”Anglia106 (1988): 411–14.
37Katherine O’Brien O’Keeffe,Visible Song: Transitional Literacy in Old English Verse(Cambridge University Press, 1990).
38Thomas Cable did gesture toward this conclusion: “The alliterative line did not evolve in lock step with changes in the language. Middle English meter, in following closely the Old English categories of inflectional syllables and grammatical stress, is more conservative than is usually recognized” (“Old and Middle English Prosody: Transformations of the Model,” inHermeneutics and Medieval Culture, ed. Patrick J. Gallacher and Helen Damico [Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1989], 209).
39To take but two examples, discussing exceptions to the rules for final -eat line end, Cable concludes, “The scribal -ethat appears on some of these words is not justified by my present formulation of principles” (English Alliterative Tradition, 73), while Yakovlev muses, “What cannot be determined from the written page may be recovered by metrical analysis” (“Development,” 96). There is a risk of circularity here, for much linguistic information is of course mined from poetry, messy orthography and all. Conversely, scribes may have smoothed out some lines. Where their efforts extend beyond mere orthographical dress-up, these interventions pose a problem for metrical analysis; see Duggan, “Final -e,” 121–22, and “The Evidential Basis for Old English Metrics,”Studies in Philology85 (1988): 145–63. Nevertheless, critics of so-called optimist corpus analysis risk overstating the case. The regularity uncovered by the new metrical results indicates that scribes’ impact on verse form was either minimal or so congruent with poets’ own practice as to be irrelevant. “Certain gross scribal changes can be identified [sc. in a given MS ofPiers Plowman], but many are forever unassignable between scribe and author. We can assume that some of these changes would have been unassignable by Langland himself after his text grew cold, because the part of the scribal grammar that produced them overlaps with part of Langland’s grammar. With this realization the urgent first question of the textual editor (What did the author write?) suddenly becomes less urgent” (Cable, “Middle English Meter,” 67).
40It was the desire for principles of emendation that spurred Hoyt Duggan to heroic feats of compilation and collation (“Shape of the B-Verse,” 564–65). Working before Nicolay Yakovlev’s and the Bristolians’ work, and loath to formulate the metrical significance of final -eas a rule, Duggan implemented his ideas about the b-verse to uncertain results inThe Wars of Alexander, ed. Duggan and Thorlac Turville-Petre, EETS, s.s., 10 (Oxford University Press, 1989). Duggan’s discoveries also informed editorial decisions inThe Siege of Jerusalem, ed. Ralph Hanna and David Lawton, EETS, o.s., 320 (Oxford University Press, 2003). On metrical considerations in editing Middle English alliterative poetry, see esp. Donka Minkova,Alliteration and Sound Change in Early English(Cambridge University Press, 2003), 87–90; Myra Stokes, “Metre and Emendation:Sir Gawain and the Green Knight660b and 815a,” in Jefferson and Putter,Approaches, 255–67; Judith Jefferson and Ad Putter, “Alliterative Metre and Editorial Practice: The Case ofDeath and Liffe,” in Jefferson and Putter,Approaches, 269–92; and Thorlac Turville-Petre’s review of the Jefferson and Putter volume inJournal of English and Germanic Philology109 (2010): 240–42.
41For the similarity in stress assignment, compare the hierarchy of prosodic stress for Old English verse outlined in Calvin B. Kendall,The Metrical Grammar of Beowulf(Cambridge University Press, 1991), and Haruko Momma,The Composition of Old English Poetry(Cambridge University Press, 1997), to Hoyt Duggan, “Stress Assignment in Middle English Alliterative Poetry,”Journal of English and Germanic Philology89 (1990): 309–29, and Cable,English Alliterative Tradition, 80.
42The alternative view, that metrical rules are constantly reformulated on the basis of linguistic change, causes more problems than it solves. Duggan readily concedes that “at some point in the tradition of composing long line poetry, a metrical rule required a single unstressed syllable at the end of every b-verse” (“End of the Line,” 69–70). Yet he scans words ending in historical -eon the basis of their post-sound-change forms. Duggan is thus forced to accept as metrical the rhythm (x)/x/, a pattern declared unmetrical in the b-verse by every Middle English metrist, including Duggan himself. See Duggan, “Final -e,” 122 and 126; Cable,English Alliterative Tradition, 92; Angus McIntosh, “Early Middle English Alliterative Verse,” in Lawton,Middle English Alliterative Poetry, 20–33; Hanna, “Defining,” 45–46; Russom, “Evolution,” 279; and Yakovlev, “Development,” 92. Duggan has confused meter and prosody, as distinguished, e.g., by Obst: “Es ist eine Sache, eine Textstruktur metrisch zu beschreiben, wie sie ist, und eine andere, zu beschreiben, wie sie entstanden ist” (It is one thing to describe a textual structure metrically as it is, and another to describe how it arose) (Rhythmus, 106); and by Momma,Composition, 15–17.
43It took centuries following the disappearance of final -ein spoken English for the requirement of an unstressed syllable at the end of the b-verse to disappear. B-verses with no final -eat line end appear in William Dunbar’sThe Tretis of the Tua Mariit Wemen and the Wedo(ca. 1500) and most other post-1450 alliterative poems. See Duggan, “End of the Line,” 78.
44“The thesis deals with the history of the alliterative long line from Old English to both early and late Middle English, and demonstrates that the differences between the metrical systems of those periods are explicable in their entirety by the historical changes in the linguistic prosody rather than a discontinuity of the alliterative tradition” (Yakovlev, “Development,” ii).
45Metrists’ occasional reversion to the language of performance and speech only muddies the waters, e.g., “metre shows that [vowels between a consonant and an ‘r’] were indeed pronounced [in Lawman]” (ibid., 197) and “instances of final <-e> in alliterative long-line poetry were…sounded” (Duggan, “End of the Line,” 70).
46Francis P. Magoun, “Oral-Formulaic Character of Anglo-Saxon Narrative Poetry,”Speculum28 (1953): 446–67.
47Derek Pearsall,Old English and Middle English Poetry(London: Routledge, 1977), 155.
48Similarly, Roberta Frank identifies both thematic content and morphology as possible criteria for distinguishing short-ending from circumflex-ending compound elements in Kaluza verses; see Frank, “Scandal,” 858–61. See also Weiskott, “Semantic Replacement.” Hutcheson, “Kaluza’s Law,” contains a complete list of relevant second compound elements, arranged by weight and grammatical form.
Article DOI© 2013 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved.
Crossref reports the following articles citing this article:
