old id = 1067
The New Breed
2017
https://us.macmillan.com/books/9781250296115/thenewbreed

Book detailsThe New BreedWhat Our History with Animals Reveals about Our Future with RobotsAuthor:Kate DarlingThe New BreedAuthor:Kate Darling1WORKERS TRAINED AND ENGINEERED[Content warning for this chapter: animal cruelty]“We have used pigeons, not because the pigeon is an intelligent bird, but because it is a practical one and can be made into a machine, from all practical points of view.”—B. F. SkinnerOne of the most enjoyable experiences in Claire Spottiswoode’s life was the first time she walked through the woods, letting a little bird lead her to honey. Spottiswoode is a zoologist at the University of Cambridge and the University of Cape Town. She’s done extensive field research in the savannas of southern Africa, learning how the Yao villagers communicate with a bird called the honeyguide.
The honeyguide is one of the few avians that can digest wax. To access their food of choice, they have evolved to attract the attention of humans, then lead them to beehives. Once people have harvested the sweet, golden honey, the honeyguide gobbles up the exposed comb and grubs. The birds and humans form a perfect team: the honeyguides are far better at finding beehives, which are often located high in the trees, but they need human help to open them.
The honeyguide-human collaboration goes back to at least the 1500s, but some zoologists think that we’ve searched for beehives together for closer to 1.9 million years. Honeyguides aren’t the only animals that we’ve partnered with—we’ve harnessed animals’ unique skills to help us with tasks for millennia. Some, like the honeyguide, have evolved in a way that happens to be useful to people, and others have been intentionally domesticated and bred to live and work with us, their entire genetic lineages changed in the process.
The reason we’ve partnered with animals is not because they do what humans do. We’ve partnered with them because their skills are different from ours, and because we have much more to gain from combining their strengths with our own. In the same way, technology can and should be a supplement to our own abilities, a way to find the honey we could never reach alone. But this is not how we currently think about robots.
One muggy midsummer day, I stood outside the Baltimore/Washington airport and summoned a ride from the Lyft app on my phone. An older-generation red Prius pulled up nearly immediately and I slid into the back seat, relieved that, despite my delayed flight, I was going to make it to my destination with a few minutes to spare. We cruised down the highway toward Baltimore. My driver, Debbie, was listening to an R&B station, but turned down the volume once the music switched to advertisements so that we could chat. When I told her what I did, she asked the question I’ve discussed with nearly every driver I’ve taken a ride with in countless cities and countries over the past ten years: “How long will it take before I’m replaced by a robot?” We spent the next twenty minutes talking about robots and jobs. Debbie, who was close to retirement age, said that she had heard on the news that all human work would be replaced by robots. She was hopeful she could drive for a few more years and retire before it happened, but she was worried for her grandchildren. Suddenly, Debbie realized that the navigation system had failed and we had gone fifteen minutes out of our way. I wound up being late for my panel, but I was glad that Debbie and I had time to chat.
With a big surge of interest in artificial intelligence and robotics in the past few years, the press is eagerly speculating about our future with robots, with headlines like “Will Robots Steal Your Job?,” “The Robots Are Coming, Prepare for Trouble,” and “Welcome, Robot Overlords. Please Don’t Fire Us?” In 2013, a widely promoted University of Oxford study predicted that almost half of all employment in the United States was at high risk of being replaced by robots and AI within ten to twenty years, and others have predicted even greater vulnerability. Technology is advancing at a breathtaking pace, they say. And robots, the story goes, will soon be able to do everything that humans do, while never tiring, never complaining, and working twenty-four hours a day. A 2017 Pew Research study showed that 77 percent of Americans think that during their lifetime, robots and AI will be able to do many of the jobs currently done by humans. According to Pew surveyor Aaron Smith, most people “are not incredibly excited about machines taking over those responsibilities.”Not only are we on the cusp of the robot job takeover, say the headlines; some believe the robots will take over more than our jobs. Artificial intelligence, they claim, is on the threshold of outsmarting us. Respected thinkers have raised concerns about artificial superintelligence, predicting that robots could outpace human intelligence and wreak havoc on the world. From Stephen Hawking to Elon Musk, these high-profile individuals have sounded the alarm on what they view as the greatest threat to humanity, fanning the flames of latent fears. It’s easy for people to get on board with the robot takeover narrative, at least in the West. After all, most of our mainstream science-fictional portrayal of robots has been around precisely this topic, from2001: A Space OdysseytoEx Machina.
New technologies often inspire concern, but perhaps not quite in the same way as robots. According to tech philosophy and ethics scholars Peter Asaro and Wendell Wallach, our robot narratives throughout history are about good robots turning evil, either turning against their genius creators, like Frankenstein’s monster, or turning against human civilization at large. Is this because robots inherently pose this threat? It’s worth noting that this fear seems culturally specific. Karel Capek’s famous 1920s play about the uprising of robot factory workers was performed in both Western countries and Japan. But while the West embraced its negative messages in our robot narratives, Japan gravitated toward friendlier robot portrayals in popular culture, like the famous cartoonAstro Boy. In the 1960s, Japan began to view robots as a potential driver of productivity and growth, and when robotics played a big role in Japan’s economic revival, it inspired a positive image of robots as nonthreatening and helpful to humans.
Many of my colleagues in robotics are weary of the Western trope that the robots will take all the jobs and become our overlords. The news media often reports on their work in ways that are clickbaity and alarmist, complete with an obligatory picture of the Terminator. I’ve heard curse words directed at the public intellectuals who extol the dangers of robot takeovers, and complaints that the big-name alarmists are mostly physicists, philosophers, and CEOs who don’t have in-depth knowledge of artificial intelligence or robotics. But the Cassandras tend to shoot back that the people who actually work in the field aren’t the best judges of broader trends. One night at a conference, I watched Sam Harris, a writer and philosopher with a degree in neuroscience, get on a small stage in front of about a hundred roboticists from some of the top research centers in the world and argue that artificial superintelligence was a significant and likely danger to humanity, and that the technologists who disagreed weren’t able to see the forest from their position among the trees. The ensuing uproar was monumental.
I was still thinking about his words the next day, as I rested my head against the back of my seat in a fancy black car driving smoothly down the empty early morning highway toward the airport. “What do you think about self-driving cars?” I asked the young, clean-shaven driver in a black suit and tie. He kept his eyes on the road. He told me that he had gone through a year of training to be a professional black-car driver, a lot of which was about more than just driving. He said he was trained to handle unanticipated situations, like protecting his passengers from attacks or violence, and that, if we got into an accident, his first aid skills could save my life. He asked me, solemnly: “Can a robot car do CPR?”DIRTY, DULL, DANGEROUSIt’s not that robots aren’t capable or smart—like animals, their physical and sensory abilities are often better than ours. But before I get into the animal world, I want to put the current state of robotics into perspective. Because it’s important to understand that robot abilities differ from human abilities in significant ways.
The first practical robot we put to work was a robotic arm called Unimate. Devised by inventor George Devol in the 1950s, Unimate was set up at General Motors in New Jersey to maneuver the blistering hot die-cast car parts that were dangerous for workers to handle. This factory arm was the ancestor of industrial robotics, the technology still used in manufacturing today, and it defined how we would come to view the function of robots in industrial settings.
Robots have classically been delegated jobs that qualify as one of the three Ds: tasks that are dirty, dull, or dangerous for humans. Industrial robots like Unimate ushered in a shift toward automating certain tasks that were high risk or required repetitive grunt work. The machines were accurate, and incredibly strong. Robots could do heavy lifting and take over difficult work in areas with toxic fumes or other health hazards. But they were also fairly crude and limited to very specific tasks, and they themselves were dangerous machinery to be around, necessitating cages and other safety measures to keep humans away.
After the success of welding car parts, the market for industrial robots exploded, as did innovation around what else we could use robots to do. Companies started exploring using industrial robots for tasks like packaging, palletizing, basic transport, and loading. Farming industries also got in on the action. On today’s farms, agriculture robots spray crops, plant seeds, pull weeds, and even deal with the delicate job of picking fruit. After robots permeated our industrial world, it wasn’t long before they made their way into other workplaces.
Figures from George Devol’s patent on the first robot arm, filed in 1954Copyright © 2021 by Kate DarlingThe New Breed$12.99The New BreedAuthor:Kate Darling$12.99Buy This Book From:Reviews from GoodreadsAbout This BookFor readers ofThe Second Machine AgeorThe Soul of an Octopus, a bold, exciting exploration of how building diverse kinds of relationships with robots—inspired...
Book DetailsFor readers ofThe Second Machine AgeorThe Soul of an Octopus, a bold, exciting exploration of how building diverse kinds of relationships with robots—inspired by how we interact with animals—could be the key to making our future with robot technology workThere has been a lot of ink devoted to discussions of how robots will replace us and take our jobs. But MIT Media Lab researcher and technology policy expert Kate Darling argues just the opposite, suggesting that treating robots with a bit of humanity, more like the way we treat animals, will actually serve us better. From a social, legal, and ethical perspective, she shows that our current ways of thinking don’t leave room for the robot technology that is soon to become part of our everyday routines. Robots are likely to supplement—rather than replace—our own skills and relationships. So if we consider our history of incorporating animals into our work, transportation, military, and even families, we actually have a solid basis for how to contend with this future.
A deeply original analysis of our technological future and the ethical dilemmas that await us,The New Breedexplains how the treatment of machines can reveal a new understanding of our own history, our own systems, and how we relate—not just to nonhumans, but also to one another.
Imprint PublisherHenry Holt and Co.
ISBN9781250296115In The NewsANew ScientistBest Book of 2021“Well-researched, well-developed, and well-written, Darling’s innovative proposal—to use our history of human-animal interactions as a blueprint for the future of human-robot interactions—is a must read for anyone interested in the emerging ethics of robotics.
The New Breedraises serious questions and provides some intriguing answers.”—Irene M. Pepperberg, PhD; Associate Professor at Harvard and author of theNew York TimesbestsellerAlex & Me"In this extraordinary and wide-ranging book, Kate Darling fundamentally reframes how we should understand these new forces within our life. From their effect upon the nature of work, to their critical role in the emotional life of many, robots will matter much as animals have mattered. Indeed, when we examine the role of design, Darling’s perspective helps us see how they will matter much more."—Lawrence Lessig,Roy L. Furman Professor of Law and Leadership, Harvard Law School“Inspired by how humans have partnered with animals throughout history, Darling, a robot nerd who calls her toddler 'Babybot', explores the fascinating emotional connection we have with our robots and makes a compelling case for a bright future where robots are our collaborators and companions.”—Dr. Rana el Kaliouby, scientist and entrepreneur and author ofGirl Decoded"The New Breedis a riveting and engaging book, full of wit and wisdom. It goes beyond the tired tropes of utopia and dystopia, and presents a nuanced and smart take on our relationships to robots.”—Bruce Schneier, author ofClick Here to Kill Everybody: Security and Survival in a Hyperconnected World"Endless ink has been spilled on AI and our robot future. Just when it seems there's nothing left to be said, along comes Kate Darling's book. For the first time, it seems we're having the conversation we ought to be having."—Tim O’Reilly,Founder and CEO, O'Reilly Media“[An] original, humane book.”—Nature“The New Breedoffers readers an energetic and witty overview of how our relations with animals can deliver useful insights into how robots might be incorporated into human society…By examining the past and present of our relationships with animals, [Darling] shows how we might learn lessons that will help us shape our technological future for the better.”—Science“[Darling's] timely book urges us to focus on the legal, ethical and social issues regarding consumer robotics to make sure the robotic future works well for all of us.”—New Scientist“Darling engagingly examines robots and their uses in relation to our interactions with animals—and not just pets, but also working animals such as donkeys and horses…[S]he provides a useful addition to a body of literature that is growing at a rapid pace. A provocative work of ethics that may prove altogether timely given the state of the technology.”—Kirkus Reviews“[Darling] lays out in detail the vexing issues—robot rights, robot accountability, our fears of a robot takeover, our deep-seated anthropomorphism that leads to surprising attachments to these machines…a thoughtful, constructive starting point.”—Booklist“Thought-provoking popular science that will be of interest to anyone curious about the past, present, or future of robot–human interaction.”—Library JournalAbout the CreatorsThe New Breed$12.99The New BreedAuthor:Kate Darling$12.99Buy This Book From:Reviews from GoodreadsAboutHelpNewsletter SignupA valid Email is required.
© 2022 MacmillanPowered bySupadu{{{item.widgetTitle}}}{{item.title}}{{item.series}}By {{item.contributorByLine}}{{item.name}}By {{item.contributorByLine}}There was an error.
Showing {{totalResults}} Results For:Showing {{currentPage}} of {{totalPages}}Try searching for something else, or head back to our Homepage if you’re feeling lost!
