old id = 1123
Indaba - Deep Learning Indaba 2017
2017
https://deeplearningindaba.com/2017

University of the Witwatersrand,Johannesburg, South Africa10 Sep - 15 Sep 2017We have formed a partnership with several South African researchers, to organise the 1st Deep Learning Indaba from 10 to 15 September 2017 at the University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg.
IndabaThe first Deep Learning Indaba will take place in September this year: a series of master classes on deep learning and machine learning for South African researchers and technologists. Deep learning, and the more general area of machine learning, is the technology that underlies the recent advances in data science and artificial intelligence that is set to transform the way the world works. There is at present a major global focus on machine learning involving billions of dollars in investment and revenue; artificial intelligence, and by implication machine learning, is set to change the working of the world.
Africans have a low participation in this area of science, although we have the skills and energy to take full advantage of these technologies. We have formed a partnership with several South African researchers, to organise the1st Deep Learning Indaba from 10 to 15 September 2017at the University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg. Given the increasing focus on machine learning, our aim is to stimulate the participation of South Africans, and Africans more generally, within the research and innovation landscape surrounding deep learning and machine learning.
We hope this will become an annual event for students, research staff, industry and entrepreneurs, supporting training and engagement with research at the forefront of the field. For this first event, we aim to support 50 students fully, and are eager to increase the number of fully sponsored attendees, depending on our funding.
​SpeakersWe are proud to have these machine learning scientists to teach and share their experiences at the Indaba.
PostersPosters are an interactive and visual way of explaining your work, getting feedback on ideas, and for meeting new people.
VenueThe Indaba will be held at the University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, within the Wits Science Stadium, Auditorium 2.
SponsorsProgrammeContact usDeep Learning IndabaStrengthening African Machine Learninginfo@deeplearningindaba.comCopyright © Deep Learning Indaba 2017 - 2022. All Rights Reserved.
