old id = 1136
Code of Ethics and Conduct - Deep Learning Indaba
2017
https://deeplearningindaba.com/mentorship/code-of-ethics-and-conduct

Code of Ethics and ConductAs participants in the Indaba Mentorship Programme, you are asked and expected to comply with the code of ethics and conduct outlined here. We ask that you recall a central principle of African philosophy, whether you know it as ujamaa (Swahili), umuntu (Chichewa), ubuntu (Zulu), unhu (Shona), djema’a (Arabic), or through the many other words used across our continent: the philosophy of familyhood and unity.
This code of conduct and ethics outlines what the expected standards of behaviour on all Indaba platforms and events are. It is every participant’s responsibility to uphold, and is how we maintain an environment that keeps everyone safe and welcome. This document consists of two parts, the Code of Conduct and the Code of Ethics.
Code of Conduct:Every participant is responsible for promoting and creating a safe experience for all participants, regardless of gender, gender identity and expression, sexual orientation, ability, physical appearance, body size, race, ethnicity, nationality, age, religion, or socioeconomic status.
Code of Ethics:Every participant is tasked to comply with the following ethical principles: Contribute to society and to human well-being; Uphold high standards of scientific excellence; Avoid harm; Be honest, trustworthy and transparent; Be fair and take action to avoid discrimination; Respect the work required to produce new ideas and artefacts; Respect privacy; Honour confidentiality.
Code of ConductOur duty as an Indaba community is to create a familyhood of people and cultures and learning, built on the principles of collective personsonhood, freedom, equality and unity; and towards the aim of strengthening African machine learning. We best serve each other when we allow each other the freedom to be as we are; only on the basis of equality – between genders, nationalities or other differences – can we work together cooperatively; and when we are united as a society can we work towards the good of all.
Every participant of the Indaba Mentorship Programme must fiercely defend these principles, and make it their responsibility to uphold this spirit of togetherness.
Unacceptable BehaviourWe are committed to creating a safe experience for all participants in the Indaba Mentorship Programme, and will not tolerate harassment of participants in any form. Participants violating these rules may be sanctioned or expelled permanently at the discretion of the organisers.
Forms of harassment and discriminatory behavior include, but are not limited to:These acts are unacceptable at any and all Indaba events and programmes, whether organised by the Indaba organisers, sponsors of the Indaba, or by participants themselves.
Reporting an IncidentYou can report an incident or concern in two ways:Anonymous reportingYou can make an anonymous report by completing this form or athttps://deeplearningindaba.com/about/code-of-conduct/. This is an anonymous form that does not require an email address or other identifying information.
We can’t follow-up an anonymous report with you directly, but we will fully investigate it and take whatever action is necessary to prevent a recurrence.
Personal reportingYou can make a personal report by sending an email toconduct@deeplearningindaba.com, through the Baobab platform contacts, or by directly contacting an Indaba organiser. In your report, please include all relevant information so that we can handle the case appropriately.
When making a personal report, the organisers will ensure your report is kept confidential. They may involve other staff/organisers/partners to ensure your report is managed properly.
Enforcing our StandardsAny participants of the Indaba Mentorship Programme that are asked to stop any harassing or discriminatory behavior are expected to comply immediately. A response of “just joking” or “teasing” or “playful” will not be accepted; behavior can be harassing without an intent to offend.
If a participant engages in behaviour that breaks this code of conduct, the Indaba organisers retain the right to take any actions needed to keep the Programme as a welcoming environment for all participants. This includes:Code of EthicsThe Mentorship Programme will involve various forms of scientific, technical and professional exchange which should adhere to general ethical principles which we outline in this Code of Ethics. This Code is applicable to both individual researchers and to organisations that carry out, fund, host, or are otherwise involved in research, and associated with the Indaba. The Code should not be seen as prescriptive but as a set of principles to guide ethical, responsible research, participation and engagement.
Contribute to Society and to Human Well-beingUphold High Standards of Scientific ExcellenceAvoid HarmBe Honest, Trustworthy and TransparentBe Fair and Take Action not to DiscriminateRespect the Work Required to Produce New Ideas and ArtefactsRespect PrivacyHonour ConfidentialityOngoing ReviewThe Indaba strives to create a positive and inclusive environment. As such, the Indaba organisers periodically review this Code of Conduct and Ethics (at least annually) to ensure that it continues to align with the philosophy of familyhood and unity, and addresses the needs of our community. The Indaba organisers welcome feedback. All feedback can be sent to us by email at conduct@deeplearningindaba.com.
AcknowledgementsThis Code of Conduct was written by adapting the wording and structure from the Geek Feminism Wiki, the We Rise Tech Conference, the Conference on Neural and Information Processing Systems, and the ICLR Code of Conduct and Code of Ethics.
Contact usDeep Learning IndabaStrengthening African Machine Learninginfo@deeplearningindaba.comCopyright © Deep Learning Indaba 2017 - 2022. All Rights Reserved.
