old id = 2498
Larry Page’s air taxi startup is buying former DJI rival 3D Robotics - The Verge
2017
https://www.theverge.com/2021/6/11/22530073/larry-page-kitty-hawk-3d-robotics-drone-air-taxi

Follow The Verge online:Site searchThe Verge main menuFiled under:Larry Page’s air taxi startup is buying former DJI rival 3D RoboticsKitty Hawk is looking to go fully autonomousShare this storyShareAll sharing options for:Larry Page’s air taxi startup is buying former DJI rival 3D RoboticsKitty Hawk, the air taxi company backed by Google co-founder Larry Page, is buying what’s left of one-time DJI competitor 3D Robotics. As part of the acquisition, 3D Robotics co-founder Chris Anderson will become Kitty Hawk’s chief operating officer.
The acquisitionwas first reported byForbes, which published a detailed look at the current state of Kitty Hawk and its new focus on developing a remote-piloted electric vertical takeoff and landing (eVTOL) aircraft on Friday.
Anderson will serve under CEO Sebastian Thrun, a former Google executive who founded the company’s self-driving car project (before it became standalone company Waymo) and launched its famous “X” moonshot division.
3D Robotics was, for a short while, the lone American company trying to carve out space in the budding consumer drone market against early entrants like France’s Parrot and China’s DJI. But as DJI began to dominate the market, 3D Robotics abandoned its consumer product (which had autonomous capabilities and wascalled Solo), laid off some employees, and spent the years since developing software for commercial drones. Late last year, though, the company asked the Federal Aviation Administration to certify a drone for government use that “may” rely heavily on automation, signaling a lingering interest in hardware.
Some personal/professional news: I'll be joining@kittyhawkcorp(Larry Page & Sebastian Thrun's eVTOL company) as COO as part of a 3DR acquisition. The path from drones to remotely-piloted passenger aircraft is becoming increasingly clear, especially from a FAA cert basis...
“The path from drones to remotely-piloted passenger aircraft is becoming increasingly clear, especially from a FAA [certification] basis,” AndersontweetedFriday. “The two share many similar technologies, from power systems to autopilots, so it will be interesting to see where scaled-up drones & scaled-down traditional aviation meet.”3D Robotics is not the only drone company to work on autonomous technology. Fellow startup Skydio released two versions of its own self-flying camera drone before recentlyshifting focusto include enterprise andmilitary customers.
Page founded Kitty Hawk in 2015, though the company didn’t break cover until 2017. The startup’s initial focus was around a small personal electric aircraft called the Flyer, which Kitty Hawk said would be so simple to fly that a pilot’s license wouldn’t be required. It even said at the time that a commercial versionwould be available in late 2017.
Kitty Hawk developed a working prototype of the Flyer and even showed off a much sleeker version the following year. The startup also revealeda second aircraft called Corain 2018 that it handed off to a joint venture with Boeing. But Kitty Hawk abandoned the Flyer in 2020, laid off dozens of employees, and turned its attention toward a third electric aircraft in development. That aircraft, called Heaviside,looks more like a traditional planeand more closely resembles the vehicles being built by numerous other eVTOL startups likeArcher,Joby, andLilium.
While the plan with Heaviside was originally for it to be piloted, the company is now working toward making it fully autonomous, according to theForbesreport. Thrun reportedly pushed so hard for this change in direction that Kitty Hawk fired the engineer behind the aircraft, Damon Vander Lind, in May after he fought for the original vision. The report also details a number of recent employee departures, including a few engineers who left Kitty Hawk after they believed Vander Lind retaliated against them for raising safety concerns about Heaviside.
Next Up InTechSign up for the newsletterVerge DealsSubscribe to get the best Verge-approved tech deals of the week.
Just one more thing!Please confirm your subscription to Verge Deals via the verification email we just sent you.
Loading comments...
Share this story
