old id = 2597
Announcing AI21 Studio and Jurassic-1 Language Models
2017
https://www.ai21.com/blog/announcing-ai21-studio-and-jurassic-1

Announcing AI21 Studio and Jurassic-1 Language ModelsAI21 Labs’ new developer platform offers instant access to our 178B-parameter language model, to help you build sophisticated text-based AI applications at scaleWe are thrilled to announce the launch of AI21 Studio, our new developer platform where you can use our state-of-the-art Jurassic-1 language models to build your own applications and services. Jurassic-1 models come in two sizes, where the Jumbo version, at 178B parameters, is the largest and most sophisticated language model ever released for general use by developers. AI21 Studio is currently in open beta, allowing anyone to sign up and immediately start querying Jurassic-1 using our API and interactive web environment.
Our mission at AI21 Labs is to fundamentally reimagine the way humans read and write by introducing machines as thought partners, and the only way we can achieve this is if we take on this challenge together. We’ve been researching language models since our Mesozoic Era (aka 2017 😉). Jurassic-1 builds on this research, and it is the first generation of models we’re making available for widespread use.
Jurassic-1 models are highly versatile, capable of both human-like text generation, as well as solving complex tasks such as question answering, text classification and many others. Our models utilize a unique 250,000-token vocabulary which is not only much larger than most existing vocabularies (5x or more), but also the first to include multi-word tokens such as expressions, phrases, and named entities. Because of this, Jurassic-1 needs fewer tokens to represent a given amount of text, thereby improving computational efficiency and reducing latency significantly.
‍Check out our white paperfor more technical details, as well as a thorough evaluation of our models.
In order to help developers scale their applications beyond a proof-of-concept and efficiently serve production-scale traffic, AI21 Studio allows developers to train custom versions of Jurassic-1 models. Training a custom model is easy and requires as few as 50-100 training examples. Once trained, your custom model is served in AI21 Studio and immediately available for your exclusive use.
We created AI21 Studio to democratize access to cutting-edge AI technology. Using Jurassic-1 within AI21 Studio, you can quickly build text-based applications that rival those being dreamed up in the world’s biggest labs, even if you have no prior experience. We’ve been using AI21 Studio internally to power our own applications, and it has propelled our product development immensely.
Now it’s your turn.
‍GET STARTED NOW‍To learn more, visit our blog posts highlightingdifferent use-cases for Jurassic-1and demonstrating how tobootstrap a custom model in AI21 Studioor read the AI21 Studiodocumentation.
‍Read our officialpress release.
Enjoyed this?Stay up to date with the latest research and updates from AI21 Labs.
Announcing AI21 Studio and Jurassic-1 Language ModelsWhat is a MRKL system?In August 2021 we released Jurassic-1, a 178B-parameter autoregressive language model. We’re thankful for the reception it got – over 10,000 developers signed up, and hundreds of commercial applications are in various stages of development. Mega models such as Jurassic-1, GPT-3 and others are indeed amazing, and open up exciting opportunities. But these models are also inherently limited. They can’t access your company database, don’t have access to current information (for example, latest COVID numbers or dollar-euro exchange rate), can’t reason (for example, their arithmetic capabilities don’t come close to that of an HP calculator from the 1970s), and are prohibitively expensive to update.
A MRKL system such as Jurassic-X enjoys all the advantages of mega language models, with none of these disadvantages. Here’s how it works.
There are of course many details and challenges in making all this work - training the discrete experts, smoothing the interface between them and the neural network, routing among the different modules, and more. To get a deeper sense for MRKL systems, how they fit in the technology landscape, and some of the technical challenges in implementing them,see our MRKL paper. For a deeper technical look at how to handle one of the implementation challenges, namely avoiding model explosion,see our paper on leveraging frozen mega LMs.
A further look at the advantages of Jurassic-XEven without diving into technical details, it’s easy to get a sense for the advantages of Jurassic-X. Here are some of the capabilities it offers, and how these can be used for practical applications.
Reading and updating your database in free languageLanguage models are closed boxes which you can use, but not change. However, in many practical cases you would want to use the power of a language model to analyze information you possess - the supplies in your store, your company’s payroll, the grades in your school and more. Jurassic-X can connect to your databases so that you can ‘talk’ to your data to explore what you need- “Find the cheapest Shampoo that has a rosy smell”, “Which computing stock increased the most in the last week?” and more. Furthermore, our system also enables joining several databases, and has the ability to update your database using free language (see figure below).
AI-assisted text generation on current affairsLanguage models can generate text, yet can not be used to create text on current affairs, because their vast knowledge (historic dates, world leaders and more) represents the world as it was when they were trained. This is clearly (and somewhat embarrassingly) demonstrated when three of the world’s leading language models (including our own Jurassic-1) still claim Donald Trump is the US president more than a year after Joe Biden was sworn into office.
Jurassic-X solves this problem by simply plugging into resources such as Wikidata, providing it with continuous access to up-to-date knowledge. This opens up a new avenue for AI-assisted text generation on current affairs.
Who is the president of the United States?Performing math operationsA 6 year old child learns math from rules, not only by memorizing examples. In contrast, language models are designed to learn from examples, and consequently are able to solve very basic math like 1-, 2-, and possibly 3- digit addition, but struggle with anything more complex. With increased training time, better data and larger models, the performance will improve, but will not reach the robustness of an HP calculator from the 1970s. Jurassic-X takes a different approach and calls upon a calculator whenever a math problem is identified by the router. The problem can be phrased in natural language and is converted by the language model to the format required by the calculator (numbers and math operations). The computation is performed and the answer is converted back into free language.
Importantly (see example below) the process is made transparent to the user by revealing the computation performed, thus increasing the trust in the system. In contrast, language models provide answers which might seem reasonable, but are wrong, making them impractical to use.
The company had 655400 shares which they divided equally among 94 employees. How many did each employee get?CompositionalitySolving simple questions might require multiple steps, for example - “Do more people live in Tel Aviv or in Berlin?” requires answering: i. What is the population of Tel-Aviv? ii. What is the population of Berlin? iii. Which is larger? This is a highly non-trivial process for a language model, and language models fail to answer this question (see example). Moreover, the user can’t know the process leading to the answers, hence is unable to trust them. Jurassic-X can decompose such problems into the basic questions, route each to the relevant expert, and put together an answer in free language. Importantly, Jurassic-X not only provides the correct answer but also displays the steps taken to reach it, increasing the trust in the system.
Do more people live in Tel Aviv or in Berlin?[‘Return population of Tel Aviv’; Return population of Berlin’; Return which is bigger between #1 and #2’]Step 1: Population of Tel Aviv. Result - 451523.
Step 1: Population of Berlin. Result - 3664088.
Step 3: Which is bigger, #1 or #2. Result - Berlin.
Dynamic information (like weather and currency exchange rates)Certain types of information change continuously - weather, currency exchange rates, share values and more. Such information will never be captured by language models, yet can easily be handled by Jurassic-X by integrating it with a reliable source of information. We performed a proof-of-concept on two such features - weather and currency exchange rates, and the design enables quick integration with more sources to solve your use-case.
Weather - a loosely phrased question about the weather elicits an answer from all language models, where language models always return the same answer, regardless of when the question was asked (funny, right?), while Jurassic-X provides an answer based on the actual weather prediction.
I’m going to be in New-York in 3 days. Should I pack my umbrella?Currency exchange rates change much faster than weather predictions, yet the Jurassic-X concept - a language model connected to a reliable source of information - easily solves this problem as well.
How much Moroccan money will I get for 100 bucks?Transparency and trustTransparency is a critical element that is lacking in language models, preventing a much wider adoption of these models. This lack of transparency is demonstrated by the answers to the question - “Was Clinton ever elected as president of the United States?”. The answer, of course, depends on which Clinton you have in mind, which is only made clear by Jurassic-X that has a component for disambiguation. More examples of Jurassic-X’s transparency were demonstrated above - displaying the math operation performed to the user, and the answer to the simple sub-questions in the multi-step setting.
Was Clinton ever elected president of the United States?Your TurnThat's it, you get the picture. The use cases above give you a sense for some things you could do with Jurassic-X, but now it's your turn. A MRKL system such as Jurassic-X is as flexible as your imagination. What do you want to accomplish?Contact us for early accessContact us below and we will get back to you shortly.
Thank you!Related ArticlesIntroducing J1-Grande!Jurassic-X: Crossing the Neuro-Symbolic Chasm with the MRKL SystemIntroducing Wordtune ReadZero-to-Production: Bootstrapping a Custom Model in AI21 StudioAll Rights Reserved © AI21 Labs, 2021
