old id = 250
Intel's Brain-Inspired Loihi 2 Chip Can Hold a Million Artificial Neurons
2017
https://singularityhub.com/2021/10/11/intels-brain-inspired-loihi-2-chip-can-hold-a-million-artificial-neurons

Intel’s Brain-Inspired Loihi 2 Chip Can Hold a Million Artificial NeuronsComputer chips that recreate the brain’s structure in silicon are a promising avenue for powering the smartrobotsof the future. Now Intel has released an updated version of its Loihi neuromorphic chip, which it hopes will bring that dream closer.
Despitefrequentcomparisons, the neural networks that power today’s leadingAIsystems operate very differentlythanthe brain. While the “neurons” used in deep learning shuttle numbers back and forth betweenoneanother, biologicalneuronscommunicate in spikes of electrical activity whose meaning is tied up intheir timing.
That is a very different language from the one spoken by modern processors, and it’s been hard to efficiently implement these kinds of spiking neurons on conventional chips. To getaround this roadblock, so-called “neuromorphic” engineersbuild chips thatmimic the architecture of biological neural networksto make running these spiking networks easier.
The field has been around for a while, but in recent years it’s piqued the interest of major technology companies like Intel, IBM, and Samsung. Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are considerably less developed than the deep learning algorithms that dominate modern AI research. But they have the potential to be far faster and more energy-efficient, which makes them promising for running AI on power-constrained edge devices like smartphones or robots.
Intel entered the fray in 2017 with itsLoihi neuromorphic chip, which could emulate 125,000 spiking neurons. But now the company has released a major update that can implementone million neurons and istentimes faster than its predecessor.
“Our second-generation chip greatly improves the speed, programmability, and capacity of neuromorphic processing, broadening its usages in power and latency constrained intelligent computing applications,” Mike Davies, director of Intel’s Neuromorphic Computing Lab,said in a statement.
Loihi 2 doesn’t only significantly boost the number of neurons, it greatly expands their functionality. Asoutlined byIEEE Spectrum,the new chip is much more programmable, allowing it to implement a wide range of SNNs rather than the single type of model the previous chip was capable of.
It’s also capable of supporting a wider variety of learning rules that should, among other things, make it more compatible with the kind of backpropagation-based training approaches used in deep learning. Faster circuits also mean the chip can now run at 5,000 times the speed of biological neurons, and improved chip interfaces make it easier to get several of them working in concert.
Perhaps the most significant changes, though, are to the neurons themselves. Each neuron canrun its own program, making it possible to implement a variety of different kinds of neurons. And the chip’s designers have taken it upon themselves to improve onMotherNature’s designs by allowing the neurons to communicate using bothspike timing and strength.
Thecompany doesn’t appear to have any plans to commercialize the chips, though, and for the time being they will only be available over the cloud to members of the Intel Neuromorphic Research Community.
But the company does seem intent on building up the neuromorphic ecosystem. Alongside the new chip, it has also released a new open-source software framework called LAVA to help researchers build “neuro-inspired” applications that can run on any kind of neuromorphic hardware or even conventional processors. “LAVA is meant to help get neuromorphic [programming] to spread to the wider computer science community,” DaviestoldArs Technica.
That will be a crucial step if the company ever wants its neuromorphic chips to be anything more than a novelty for researchers. But given the broad range of applications for the kind of fast, low-power intelligence they could one day provide, it seems like a sound investment.
Image Credit: IntelFollow Edd:LatestThis Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through May 21)Volvo and DHL Are Partnering on Hub-to-Hub Autonomous TruckingHow a Volcanic Bombardment in Ancient Australia Led to the World’s Greatest Climate CatastropheRELATEDNanomagnetic Computing Could Drastically Cut AI’s Energy UseThe Ideal Qubit? Future Quantum Computers Could Crunch Data With Single Electrons on Neon IceScientists Just Cracked One-Way Superconductivity, Thought Impossible for Over 100 YearsHow the Extinction of Ice Age Mammals May Have Forced Us to Invent CivilizationGet the latest news from Singularity Hub!Singularity University, Singularity Hub, Singularity Summit, SU Labs, Singularity Labs, Exponential Medicine, Exponential Finance and all associated logos and design elements are trademarks and/or service marks of Singularity Education Group.
© 2022 Singularity Education Group. All Rights Reserved.
Singularity University is not a degree granting institution.
