old id = 3516
Opinion: Innovating in a Crisis: How the World Food Programme is Adapting to COVID-19 and Why You Should Care | 2020-05-05  | Agri-Pulse Communications, Inc.
2017
https://www.agri-pulse.com/articles/13615-opinion-innovating-in-a-crisis-how-the-world-food-programme-is-adapting-to-covid-19-and-why-you-should-care

We use cookies to provide you with a better experience. By continuing to browse the site you are agreeing to our use of cookies in accordance with ourPrivacy Terms and Cookie PolicyOpinion: Innovating in a Crisis: How the World Food Programme is Adapting to COVID-19 and Why You Should CareWe face an unprecedented crisis as a global humanitarian community. The scale of COVID-19’s impact on world markets and subsequent mass restrictions on the movement of goods and people has not been seen since the second World War, well before the World Food Programme (WFP) was established in 1961, at the behest of then U.S. President Eisenhower. And even in the recent years before this latest crisis, conflict, climate change and natural disasters had already pushed more internally displaced people and refugee communities to the edge, having to rely on humanitarian aid from WFP and others. It is vital at this critical moment that WFP maintain its food assistance programmes, which offer a lifeline to 87 million vulnerable people in more than 80 countries around the world. WFP’s top priority is to ensure it has the resources in place to meet the food and nutrition needs of the people that so depend on it.
At that time of WFP’s establishment, the United States was producing a surplus of grain. The idea behind creating WFP was to responsibly share that abundance of food with vulnerable countries and communities around the world. Since then, we have innovated and evolved and moved towards food vouchers and direct cash-based assistance, supporting local markets where they already exist and providing hungry families with freedom of choice - in many contexts the most efficient and effective solution. But with global and local markets now disrupted, WFP has had to re-evaluate how we can best deliver assistance where it’s needed most.
As WFP’s Acting Supply Chain Director, John Criscirecently told Axios, "There is enough food, but food and other essential commodities must keep moving. We cannot let this health crisis turn into a food crisis."This is the crux of the problem we face.
To help tackle these immense challenges, theWFP Innovation Acceleratorhas been working for the past five years to identify, support, and scale the best solutions globally to achieveSustainable Development Goal (SDG) 2: Zero Hungerby 2030. While the concept of accelerators, incubators or labs is widespread in the tech industry and private sector, the WFP Innovation Accelerator was pioneering this in the global social impact space - even making it on theTop 10 Most Innovative Companies List of FastCompany 2017. In 2019 alone, the Acceleratorreached 1.4 million peoplethrough these innovative programs, utilizing hydroponics, blockchain, artificial intelligence and mobile apps to support refugees, vulnerable host communities and smallholder farmers, amongst other initiatives. Leveraging this experience, we have also recently provided innovation services to theBill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Creating Hope in Conflict: A Humanitarian Grand Challenge, UNICEF, and our first-evervirtual bootcamp with UNHCR, amongst others. In 2020, now and more than ever, our vision must be even further strategically aligned with the larger humanitarian community, as from the start of this new year and new decade priorities have shifted to accomplishing our collective goals in the face of the immense challenges COVID-19 presents, now and for the foreseeable future.
From the supply chain perspective, for instance, restrictions on global movements, tighter border controls and commercial transport closures mean that the usual routes for humanitarian and health organizations are disrupted. WFP thus needs to ensure its equipment and staff can rapidly reach the areas where they are most needed. As an example, 1.6 billion children and youth – or 91 percent of enrolled learners around the world – are having to stay away from schools and universities due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Partial or country-wide closures of schools have been reported in 51 countries where WFP implements school feeding programmes. This means that more than 12 million children are no longer receiving WFP school meals.
The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) has long been a supporter of WFP’s school meals initiatives. Through theMcGovern-DoleInternational Food for Education and Child Nutrition Program, it has been one of the leading donors and supporters of school meals activities worldwide, since inception 15 years ago. Together with the U.S. and other donors, WFP has now shifted its focus to providing take-home rations, in an effort to maintain continuity for students who depend on school meals, but whose schools are closed indefinitely.
Related ArticlesLeveraging innovation to tackle the challenges created by disrupted supply chains and school meals programs specifically, WFP is providing real-time tracking of changes in the areas of food security, health access and markets in vulnerable countries. Data and analysis are visualized through web-based platforms such asHunger Map LIVE, which was a2019 WFP Innovation Challenge Winner, and participated in our first-ever U.S.-based(Silicon Valley) innovation bootcamp.
Monitoring will be complemented with early warning and security analysis of how the pandemic is impacting food and other vulnerabilities.
Another 2019 Innovation Challenge Winner is School Connect in Burundi, which digitizes school feeding data entry for stock inventory, student attendance, and meal consumption for school feeding programmes to improve supply chain planning and nutritional intake. The web-based solution is being tested in 20 schools in Burundi and will scale up to 820 schools in 2020.
These and other initiatives must be quickly identified and rapidly scaled if we are to make an impact on current food systems, and going forward, be more resilient to not only the shock of COVID-19, but for the next crises inevitably to come.
Bernhard Kowatsch is the Head of the World Food Programme (WFP) Innovation Accelerator in Munich, Germany.
Assisting 86.7 million people in around83 countrieseach year, the World Food Programme (WFP) is the leading humanitarian organization saving lives and changing lives, delivering food assistance in emergencies and working with communities to improve nutrition and build resilience.
Established in 2016, theWFP Innovation Acceleratorsources, supports and scales high-potential solutions to hunger worldwide. We provide WFP staff, entrepreneurs, start-ups, companies and non-governmental organizations with access to funding, mentorship, hands-on support and WFP operations.
Editor's Note:Agri-Pulseand theChicago Council on Global Affairsare teaming up to host a monthly column to explore how the US agriculture and food sector can maintain its competitive edge and advance food security in an increasingly integrated and dynamic world.
Top StoriesSen. John Boozman, R-Ark.
This week’s Open Mic Senate Ag Committee Ranking Member John Boozman. The Arkansas Republican says the Russian-Ukraine conflict is disrupting a major food production region and exacerbating global hunger. Boozman says it is time for Washington to act, not only addressing the immediate needs of starving people but enhancing opportunities to encourage American farmers and ranchers to step up production to meet global shortfalls. Boozman is encouraged that an upcoming committee hearing on new farm policy will include a southern perspective on production, sustainability, and climate-smart farming practices. Boozman favors the Senate version of the Ocean Shipping Reform Act and would like to see the legislation approved in short order.
OpinionsOpinion: Now 20 years old, the farm bill energy title has a bright futureIn this opinion piece from Lloyd Ritter and Aaron Whitesel of Green Capitol LLC discuss the 20thanniversary of the original farm bill energy title.
DriveTimeDriveTime: May 20, 2022Agri-Pulse NewsmakersSubscribe and get all the newsStart your free trial today.
Stay in the loop for upcoming Agri-Pulse webinars and events! Join our mailing list here:http://bit.ly/Agri-Pulse-EventsAgri-Pulse and Agri-Pulse West are your comprehensive sources of the latest in agricultural information. We take a holistic approach to covering current ag, food and energy policy news and we never miss a beat. We make it our duty to inform you of the most up-to-date agricultural and food policy decisions being made from Washington, D.C. to the west coast and examine how they will affect you: the farmer, the lobbyist, the government employee, the educator, the consultant, and the concerned citizen. We investigate several aspects of food, fuel, feed, and fiber industries, looking at the economic, statistical, and financial trends and evaluate how these changes will impact your business. We provide insight on the people and players who are making things happen. Agri-Pulse provides you with timely updates of how policy decisions will affect your productivity, your pocketbook, and your livelihood. Whether it be new developments in international trade, organic foods, farm credit and loan policies, or climate change legislation, we keep you abreast of the information you need to stay on the cutting edge.
© 2021 Agri-Pulse Communications, Inc.
