old id = 4265
Meet the Humans Building ZKVerse at Polygon — Polygon | Blog
2017
https://blog.polygon.technology/meet-the-humans-building-zkverse-at-polygon

Blog»Polygon ZKMeet the Humans Building ZKVerse at PolygonBy now even the casual observers of the blockchain space have taken notice of the zero-knowledge arsenal assembled under one roof at Polygon. But the real insiders know that what makes this portfolio truly remarkable are the individuals working to bring this technology to the world.
We would like to introduce some of the developers behind Polygon’s zero knowledge effort. But instead of focusing on their technical accomplishments, we’d like to talk about how they came to be working in this space. Their personal stories and motivations should be of interest to Polygon stakeholders, aspiring ZK developers and crypto-curious alike. This is what makes the ZKVerse tick.
Building the Decentralized StateJordi Baylina, widely considered among the top Solidity developers in the world, has one heck of a resume. Jordi's numerous contributions to Ethereum include theMiniMetoken contract and the elliptic curves Solidity library. He co-founded theGivethdonation platform andDAppNode. If that wasn’t enough, Jordi is leading teams that audit the MakerDAO Stable Coin system and Aragon project.
One of the most colorful chapters in Jordi’s storied career involves the White Hat Group, which he co-founded and which played a major role in rescuing funds in TheDAO and Parity Multisig hacks. That’s astoryin and of its own, complete with intense Mumble meetings packed with ETH whales, feats of advanced smart contract coding and reverse engineering of the hack, all with millions of dollars at stake.
OnTwitter, Jordi also identifies as a Catalonia Freedom fighter and flies theEsteladaindependence flag in his profile pic background. The events around the 2017 Catalan self-determination referendum that was blocked by the Spanish government cemented his belief in the importance of decentralization and self sovereign identity. This was the trigger of the foundation of theiden3project and the development ofCircom/SnarkJSZK privacy toolkit, now the base layer protocols of Polygon ID . “I got fully hooked on the idea of building a decentralized state. To get there, we first need to create solid decentralized networks, and that’s what drives me to build on Ethereum,” Jordi hassaid.
Jordi now leads technical development ofPolygon Hermez, the first-ever decentralized ZK Rollup on the Ethereum mainnet. Hermez is now building a ZK implementation of the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM), something that has never been accomplished and the biggest challenge of Jordi’s career, in his own words. You can follow his work onGithub.
Read more:Seven Takeaways From Polygon Hermez Fireside ChatThe Hidden DeveloperThe project lead for Polygon Miden isBobbin Threadbare, and it’s not his real name. Bobbin prefers to keep his identity private, using a pseudonym from the game Loom. Little is known about his private life, other than that he was born and raised in the former Soviet Union, before moving to the U.S.
What is well known is his contribution to the ZK field. Bobbin has worked on ZK technology with the Ethereum Foundation, where he developed AirScript and AirAssembly, and later with the cryptography research team at Facebook’s Novi, where he builtWinterfell. He was the first to release an open-source STARK-prover (genSTARK), and the first practical STARK-based virtual machine (Distaff VM). Bobbin is widely considered one of the biggest experts in STARK technology.
Bobbin got into crypto in the summer of 2018 while running a web startup that was focused on how users can maintain a personal reputation across different services and sites. It was a very centralized product with all the data basically soredon a single server, which prompted Bobbin to consider decentralized alternatives and eventually led him to ZK proofs.
“I got really interested in zero-knowledge proofs and specifically this general computational integrity proofs, which are SNARKs and STARKs,” Bobbin hassaid. “It was immediately clear to me that this is something that is really needed in blockchains. The promise is that you can verify computation and then nobody else needs to rerun the computation.
Miden is a STARK-based ZK rollup that promises low fees and very high transaction throughput while maintaining the same level of security as Ethereum. At launch, the rollup will support transactions per second in the 1,000 to 2,000 range, which will reach 20,000 TPS once sharding is deployed on Ethereum. You can follow Bobbin’s work onGithub.
Read more:Why Miden VM Will Support 32-Bit IntegersJust Do All This With SNARKsPolygon Zero (previously Mir) is the latest addition to the Polygon ZK family. The team has been working toward building the world’s fastest ZK scaling technology and has developed Plonky2, a recursive SNARK that is 100x faster than any alternative on Ethereum. Brendan Farmer and Daniel Lubarov are two of the core contributors.
Brendan built tech tools used on national political campaigns before studying pure math and philosophy as an AB Duke Scholar. He became interested in cryptography after the Snowden leaks. Herecallswandering into a Stanford auditorium where Vitalik was presenting the original Plasma paper. During that talk, Stanford Professor Dan Boneh mentioned that SNARKs could power off-chain scaling. “You could just prove state transitions on a blockchain with SNARKs. And that sort of just stuck with me.”Daniel studied computer science at Harvey Mudd. He was early at Square and worked to build scalable and fault tolerant payment systems, before moving to Google, where he contributed to Glass and Pixel Buds. After Google scrapped the Glass projects, Daniel was on the lookout for interesting projects. That’s when he came across Zcash and ZK proofs.
“When I heard about how Zcash worked and how it was possible to prove, it was mind blowing,” he said. “To provide this really strong privacy guarantee using advanced cryptography sounded great.”Brendan and Daniel met at a Zcash conference in 2018, founded Mir the following year and plunged into the deep end of ZK research. When the project was started in 2019, it took 2 minutes to generate a recursive proof that couldn’t be verified on Ethereum. With Plonky2, it takes just 170 milliseconds to do the same on a laptop. And it works natively on Ethereum.
The Polygon Zero team is building a ZK Layer 2 powered by Plonky2. The core component of this is System Zero, a novel virtual machine that runs inside a STARK and can efficiently verify the execution of compiled Ethereum contracts. Polygon Zero’s goal is to provide the most performant and scalable Layer 2 solution and to help scale Ethereum to support a billion users.
You can follow Brendan onTwitterandGithub. Daniel is also active on bothTwitterandGithub.
Read more:Introducing Plonky2Polygon’s ZK ThesisPolygon is sobullishon the future of ZK, the core development team made it a centerpiece of its strategic vision in theZero Knowledge Thesispublished in August. As part of that mission, the team has committed $1 billion, a significant portion of the treasury, to ZK-related efforts.
Over the past year, Polygon has emerged as a ZK powerhouse, assembling an unrivaled collection of R&D efforts under one roof. First was themergerwithHermez Network(nowPolygon Hermez) in August. This was followed by the announcements ofPolygon Nightfall, a privacy-focused rollup built in collaboration with EY, in September andPolygon Midenin November. A month later,Polygon Zerocame into being in a $400 million deal with pioneering ZK startup Mir.
Read more:ZKVerse: Polygon’s Zero Knowledge Strategy ExplainedPolygon is always on the lookout for new ZK talent. You can browse all the open vacancieshere, and also follow ourLinkedInpage. Tune in to ourblogto keep up with the most exciting experiments in this space.
Let’s bring the world to Ethereum!Website|Twitter|Ecosystem Twitter|Developer Twitter|Enterprise Twitter|Studios Twitter|Telegram|Reddit|Discord|Instagram|Facebook|LinkedInWe’re in the early innings when it comes to enterprise needs for blockchains. Whether it’s supply chain management or marketplaces, the potential for secure business transactions on a public ledger has enormous implications. That’s why we’re pleased to announce Polygon Nightfall, a blockchain solution that leverages cutting edge Optimistic-Zero Knowledge technology to give businesses an […]We announced Polygon Edge in May 2021, and have been building heads down with a vision for it to become the gateway to multi-chain Ethereum. Polygon Edge is a customizable blockchain stack that enables you to build and launch dedicated blockchain networks tailored specifically to your needs. It is a modular framework designed to support […]Today marks the start of a new, sustainable era for the Polygon ecosystem -- the core team has committed to eliminating all of the network’s carbon debt going back to inception and making the chain climate positive into the future. Polygon’s Green Manifesto announced today is part of a broader vision for sustainable development that […]At Polygon, we believe that putting people firmly in control of their digital identities is at the core of Web3’s promise to empower users over networks. We have been working behind the scenes to fulfill this promise and today are proud to introduce Polygon ID, the self-sovereign, decentralized and private identity for the next iteration […]MSP Recovery, a $32.6 billion publicly-traded U.S. company leading the healthcare reimbursement recovery industry, has partnered with Tokenology to launch a healthcare claims tokenization platform that will help eliminate fraud and benefit patients, care providers and insurers alike. LifeChain will run on Polygon, leveraging the carbon-neutral network’s low transaction fees, high throughput and a suite […]What’s the future of DeFi? How can blockchain projects shake the reputation for being bad for the environment? What in the world are zero knowledge proofs? How can Web3 attract and accommodate the next billion users? When Flippening? You want to know the answers and so do we. That’s why Polygon is launching Polygon Pod […]Rollups scale Ethereum by providing a separate layer where transactions can be executed. But they still rely on the mainnet to store transaction data, which is costly and eats up valuable blockspace. Polygon Avail is a modular data availability blockchain that solves this problem by taking the data off chain, helping bring the vision of […]Polygon is a protocol and a framework for building and connecting Ethereum-compatible blockchain networksGeneralTechnologyDevelopersUse PolygonGitHubTwitterTelegramDiscordRedditYouTube
