old id = 1687
About the NYU Center for Data Science – NYU Center for Data Science
2013
https://cds.nyu.edu/about

NYU Center for Data ScienceHarnessing Data’s Potential for the WorldAbout the NYU Center for Data ScienceThe Center for Data Science (CDS) is the focal point for New York University’s university-wide efforts in Data Science. The Center was established in 2013 to advance NYU’s goal of creating a world-leading Data Science training and research facility, and arming researchers and professionals with the tools to harness the power of Big Data. Today, CDS counts 18 jointly appointed interdisciplinary faculty housed on three floors of our magnificent60 5th Avenue building, one of New York City’s historic properties. It is home to a top-ranked MS in Data Science program, one of the first PhD programs in Data Science, and a new undergraduate program in Data Science, as well as a lively Fellow and Postdoctoral program. It has over 60 associate and affiliate faculty from 25 departments in 9 schools and units. With cross-disciplinary research and innovative educational programs, CDS is shaping the new field of Data Science.
The Center’s faculty members and scientistsare experts in the field of Data Science. Methodologically, they have interests in machine learning, optimization and large-scale computation, natural language processing, computational statistics, quantitative methods, responsible data use, and system design for large-scale data. They represent a multitude of application areas from neuroscience, psychology, physics, artificial intelligence, politics, medicine and healthcare, music technology, linguistics, business analytics and biology. The CDS community is interdisciplinary and actively involved in research and teaching with colleagues from academic departments around the university.
The facility, with its faculty, fellows, postdocs and PhD students, is a hotbed of interdisciplinary interaction and innovation. CDS is a place of lively intellectual exchange and offers widely-attended seminars and workshops on “Math and Data”, “Text as Data”, and “Math and Democracy”.
The CDS PhD, Master’s, Undergraduate, and prestigious Faculty Fellows programs offer excellent collaborative opportunities in Data Science education. Students graduate with a critical understanding of both applicable and ethical principles and are in high demand among employers. Our Fellows go on to hold leadership positions at top university programs and in industry. The center continues to grow and attracts new talent: CDS is proud to be a leader in Data Science at NYU and beyond.
©2022 NYU CDS 7th floor, 60 5th Ave, New York, NY, 10011NYU Center for Data Science
