old id = 3471
How AI Helped Predict the Coronavirus Outbreak Before It Happened
2013
https://singularityhub.com/2020/02/05/how-ai-helped-predict-the-coronavirus-outbreak-before-it-happened

How AI Helped Predict the Coronavirus Outbreak Before It HappenedCoronavirus has been all over the news for the last couple weeks. Adedicated hospitalsprang up in just eight days, the stock market took a hit, Chinese New Year celebrations were spoiled, and travel restrictions are in effect.
But let’s rewind a bit; some crucial events took place before we got to this point.
A little under two weeks before the WorldHealthOrganization(WHO)alerted the public of thecoronavirusoutbreak, a Canadian artificial intelligence company was alreadysoundingthe alarm. BlueDot uses AI-powered algorithms to analyze information from a multitude of sources to identify disease outbreaks and forecast how they may spread. On December 31st2019,the companysent out a warning to its customersto avoid Wuhan, where the virus originated.
The WHO didn’t send out a similar public notice until January 9th, 2020.
Thestory of BlueDot’s early warningis the latest example of howAIcan improve our identification of and response to new virus outbreaks.
Predictions Are Bad NewsGlobal pandemic or relatively minor scare? The juryis stillout on the coronavirus. However, the mathpoints to signsthattheworstis yet to come.
Scientists are still working to determine how infectiousthe virusis.
Initial analysis suggestsit may be somewhere between influenza and polio on thevirus reproduction number scale, which indicates how many new cases one case leads to.
UK and US-based researchers have published a preliminary paper estimating that the confirmed infected people in Wuhanonly representfive percentof those who are actually infected. If the models are correct, 190,000 people in Wuhanwill be infected by now, major Chinese cities are on the cusp of large-scale outbreaks, and the virus will continue to spread to other countries.
Finding the StartThe spread of a given virus is partly linked to how long it remains undetected. Identifying a new virus is the first steptowards mobilizinga response and, in time, creating a vaccine. Warning at-risk populations as quickly as possible also helps with limiting the spread.
These are among the reasons why BlueDot’s achievement is important in and of itself. Furthermore, it illustrates how AIs can sift through vast troves of data to identify ongoing virus outbreaks.
BlueDot uses natural language processing and machine learning to scour a variety of information sources, including chomping through 100,000 news reports in 65 languages a day. Data is compared with flight records to help predict virus outbreak patterns. Once the automated data sifting is completed, epidemiologists check that the findings make sense from a scientific standpoint, and reports are sent to BlueDot’s customers, which include governments, businesses, and public health organizations.
AIforVirus Detection and PreventionOther companies, such as Metabiota, are also using data-driven approaches to track the spreadof the likes of the coronavirus.
Researchers have trained neural networkstopredict the spreadof infectious diseases in real time.
Others areusingAI algorithms to identify howpreventive measurescan have the greatest effect.
AI isalsobeing used tocreate new drugs,whichwe may well see repeated for thecoronavirus.
If the work of scientists Barbara Han and David Redding comes to fruition, AI and machine learning may even help us predictwhere virus outbreaks are likely to strike—before they do.
The Uncertainty FactorOne of AI’s core strengths when working on identifying and limiting the effects of virus outbreaks is its incredibly insistent nature. AIs never tire, can sift through enormous amounts ofdata, and identify possible correlations and causations that humans can’t.
However, there are limits to AI’sability to both identify virus outbreaks and predict how they will spread. Perhaps the best-known example comes from the neighboring field of big data analytics. At its launch, Google Flu Trendswasheralded as a great leap forward in relation to identifying and estimating the spread of the flu—until it underestimated the 2013 flu season by a whopping 140 percent and was quietly put to rest.
Poor data quality was identified as one of the main reasonsGoogle Flu Trends failed.
Unreliable or faulty datacan wreak havoc on the prediction power of AIs.
In our increasingly interconnected world, tracking the movements of potentially infected individuals (by car, trains, buses, or planes)isjustonevector surrounded by a lot of uncertainty.
The fact that BlueDot was able to correctly identify the coronavirus, in part due to its AItechnology, illustrates that smart computer systems can beincredibly useful in helping usnavigatethese uncertainties.
Importantly, though, this isn’tthe same as AI being at a point whereitunerringly doesso onitsown—which is why BlueDot employs human experts to validate the AI’s findings.
Image Credit: Coronavirus molecular illustration,Gianluca Tomasello/Wikimedia CommonsFollow Marc:LatestThis Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through May 21)Volvo and DHL Are Partnering on Hub-to-Hub Autonomous TruckingHow a Volcanic Bombardment in Ancient Australia Led to the World’s Greatest Climate CatastropheRELATEDA One-and-Done CRISPR Gene Therapy Will Aim to Prevent Heart AttacksA Virus Just Wiped Out Antibiotic-Resistant Infection in an Immunocompromised PatientNanomagnetic Computing Could Drastically Cut AI’s Energy UseHow the Extinction of Ice Age Mammals May Have Forced Us to Invent CivilizationGet the latest news from Singularity Hub!Singularity University, Singularity Hub, Singularity Summit, SU Labs, Singularity Labs, Exponential Medicine, Exponential Finance and all associated logos and design elements are trademarks and/or service marks of Singularity Education Group.
© 2022 Singularity Education Group. All Rights Reserved.
Singularity University is not a degree granting institution.
