old id = 1225
Go (game) - Wikipedia
2016
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Go_(game)

Go (game)GoorWeiqi,Weichi(simplified Chinese:围棋;traditional Chinese:圍棋;pinyin:wéiqí) is anabstract strategyboard gamefor two players in which the aim is to surround more territory than the opponent. The game was invented in China more than 2,500 years ago and is believed to be the oldest board game continuously played to the present day.
[1][2][3]A 2016 survey by theInternational Go Federation's 75 member nations found that there are over 46 million people worldwide who know how to play Go and over 20 million current players, the majority of whom live inEast Asia.
[4]Theplaying piecesare calledstones. One player uses the white stones and the other, black. The players take turns placing the stones on the vacant intersections (points) of aboard. Once placed on the board, stones may not be moved, but stones are removed from the board if the stone (or group of stones) is surrounded by opposing stones on allorthogonallyadjacent points, in which case the stone or group iscaptured.
[5]The game proceeds until neither player wishes to make another move. When a game concludes, the winner is determined by counting each player's surrounded territory along with captured stones andkomi(points added to thescoreof the player with the white stones as compensation for playing second).
[6]Games may also be terminated by resignation.
The standard Go board has a 19×19gridof lines, containing 361 points. Beginners often play on smaller 9×9 and 13×13 boards,[7]and archaeological evidence shows that the game was played in earlier centuries on a board with a 17×17 grid. However, boards with a 19×19 grid had become standard by the time the game reached Korea in the 5th centuryCEand Japan in the 7th century CE.
[8]Go was considered one of thefour essential artsof the culturedaristocraticChinese scholars in antiquity. The earliest written reference to the game is generally recognized as the historical annalZuo Zhuan[9][10](c. 4th century BCE).
[11]Despite its relativelysimple rules, Go is extremely complex. Compared tochess, Go has both a larger board with more scope for play and longer games and, on average, many more alternatives to consider per move. The number of legal board positions in Go has been calculated to be approximately2.1×10170,[12][a]which is vastly greater than the number ofatomsin the observableuniverse,estimated to beof the order of 1080.
[14]ContentsEtymology[edit]The wordGois a short form of the Japanese wordigo(囲碁;いご), which derives from earlierwigo(ゐご), in turn fromMiddle Chineseɦʉi gi(圍棋,Mandarin:wéiqí,lit.
'encirclement board game' or 'board game of surrounding'). In English, the nameGowhen used for the game is often capitalized to differentiate it from the common wordgo.
[15]In events sponsored by theIng Chang-kiFoundation, it is spelledgoe.
[16]The Korean wordbadukderives from theMiddle KoreanwordBadok, the origin of which is controversial; the more plausible etymologies include the suffixdokadded toBato mean 'flat and wide board', or the joining ofBat, meaning 'field', andDok, meaning 'stone'. Less plausible etymologies include a derivation ofBadukdok, referring to the playing pieces of the game, or a derivation from Chinesepáizi(排子), meaning 'to arrange pieces'.
[17]Overview[edit]Go is an adversarial game with the objective of surrounding a larger total area of the board with one's stones than the opponent.
[18]As the game progresses, the players position stones on the board to map out formations and potential territories. Contests between opposing formations are often extremely complex and may result in the expansion, reduction, or wholesale capture and loss of formation stones.
A basic principle of Go is that a group of stones must have at least one open point bordering the group, known as aliberty, to remain on the board. One or more liberties enclosed within a group is called aneye,and a group with two or more eyes cannot be captured, even if surrounded.
[20]Such groups are said to be unconditionallyalive.
[21]The general strategy is to expand one's territory, attack the opponent's weak groups (groups that can be killed), and always stay mindful of thelife statusof one's own groups.
[22][23]The liberties of groups are countable. Situations where mutually opposing groups must capture each other or die are called capturing races, orsemeai.
[24]In a capturing race, the group with more liberties will ultimately be able to capture the opponent's stones.
[24][25][b]Capturing races and the elements of life or death are the primary challenges of Go.
Players may pass rather than place a stone if they think there are no further opportunities for profitable play.
[26]The game ends when both players pass[27]or when one player resigns. In general, to score the game, each player counts the number of unoccupied points surrounded by their stones and then subtracts the number of stones that were captured by the opponent. The player with the greater score (after adjusting forkomi) wins the game.
In the opening stages of the game, players typically establish positions (orbases) in the corners and around the sides of the board. These bases help to quickly develop strong shapes which have many options forlife(self-viability for a group of stones that prevents capture) and establish formations for potential territory.
[28]Players usually start in the corners because establishing territory is easier with the aid of two edges of the board.
[29]Established corner opening sequences are calledjosekiand are often studied independently.
[30]Dameare points that lie in between the boundary walls of black and white, and as such are considered to be of no value to either side.
Sekiare mutually alive pairs of white and black groups where neither has two eyes. Ako(Chinese and Japanese:劫) is a repeated-position shape that may be contested by making forcing moves elsewhere. After the forcing move is played, the ko may be "taken back" and returned to its original position.
[31]Someko fightsmay be important and decide the life of a large group, while others may be worth just one or two points. Some ko fights are referred to aspicnic koswhen only one side has a lot to lose.
[32]The Japanese call it a hanami (flower-viewing) ko.
[33]Playing with others usually requires a knowledge of each player's strength, indicated by the player'srank(increasing from 30 kyu to 1 kyu, then 1 dan to 7 dan, then 1 dan pro to 9 dan pro). A difference in rank may be compensated by a handicap—Black is allowed to place two or more stones on the board to compensate for White's greater strength.
[34][35]There are different rule-sets (Korean, Japanese, Chinese, AGA, etc.), which are almost entirely equivalent, except for certain special-case positions.
Rules[edit]Aside from the order of play (alternating moves, Black moves first or takes a handicap) and scoring rules, there are essentially only two rules in Go:Almost all other information about how the game is played is a heuristic, meaning it is learned information about how the game is played, rather than a rule. Other rules are specialized, as they come about through different rule-sets, but the above two rules cover almost all of any played game.
Although there are some minor differences between rule-sets used in different countries,[36]most notably in Chinese and Japanese scoring rules,[37]these differences do not greatly affect the tactics and strategy of the game.
Except where noted, the basic rules presented here are valid independent of the scoring rules used. The scoring rules are explained separately.
Go termsfor which there is no ready English equivalent are commonly called by their Japanese names.
Basic rules[edit]The two players, Black and White, take turns placing stones of their colour on the intersections of the board, one stone at a time. The usual board size is a 19×19 grid, but for beginners or for playing quick games,[38]the smaller board sizes of 13×13[39]and 9×9 are also popular.
[40]The board is empty to begin with.
[41]Black plays first unless given a handicap of two or more stones, in which case White plays first. The players may choose any unoccupied intersection to play on except for those forbidden by thekoandsuiciderules (see below). Once played, a stone can never be moved and can be taken off the board only if it iscaptured.
[42]A player may pass their turn, declining to place a stone, though this is usually only done at the end of the game when both players believe nothing more can be accomplished with further play. When both players pass consecutively, the game ends[43]and is thenscored.
Liberties and capture[edit]Vertically and horizontally adjacent stones of the same color form a chain (also called astringorgroup),[44]forming a discrete unit that cannot then be divided.
[45]Only stones connected to one another by the lines on the board create a chain; stones that are diagonally adjacent are not connected. Chains may be expanded by placing additional stones on adjacent intersections, and they can be connected together by placing a stone on an intersection that is adjacent to two or more chains of the same color.
[46]A vacant point adjacent to a stone, along one of the grid lines of the board, is called alibertyfor that stone.
[47][48]Stones in a chain share their liberties.
[44]A chain of stones must have at least one liberty to remain on the board. When a chain is surrounded by opposing stones so that it has no liberties, it is captured and removed from the board.
[49]Ko rule[edit]An example of a situation in which the ko rule applies.
Players are not allowed to make a move that returns the game to the previous position. This rule, called theko rule, prevents unending repetition.
[50]As shown in the example pictured: Black has just played the stone marked1, capturing a white stone at the intersection marked with the red circle. If White were allowed to play on the marked intersection, that move would capture the black stone marked1and recreate the situation before Black made the move marked1. Allowing this could result in an unending cycle of captures by both players. The ko rule therefore prohibits White from playing at the marked intersection immediately. Instead White must play elsewhere, or pass; Black can then end the ko by filling at the marked intersection, creating a five-stone black chain. If White wants to continue the ko (that specific repeating position), White tries to find a play elsewhere on the board that Black must answer; if Black answers, then White can retake the ko. A repetition of such exchanges is called ako fight.
[51]While the various rule-sets agree on the ko rule prohibiting returning the board to animmediatelyprevious position, they deal in different ways with the relatively uncommon situation in which a player might recreate a past position that is further removed. SeeRules of Go § Repetitionfor further information.
Suicide[edit]A player may not place a stone such that it or its group immediately has no liberties, unless doing so immediately deprives an enemy group of its final liberty. In the second case, the enemy group is captured, leaving the new stone with at least one liberty, so the new stone can be placed.
[54]This rule is responsible for the all-important difference between one and two eyes: if a group with only one eye is fully surrounded on the outside, it can be killed with a stone placed in its single eye.
TheIngand New Zealand rules do not have this rule,[55]and there a player might destroy one of its own groups (commit suicide). This play would only be useful in limited sets of situations involving a small interior space or planning.
[56]In the example at right, it may be useful as ako threat.
Komi[edit]Because Black has the advantage of playing the first move, the idea of awarding White some compensation came into being during the 20th century. This is calledkomi, which gives white a 6.5-point compensation under Japanese rules (number of points varies by rule set).
[57]Under handicap play, White receives only a 0.5-point komi, to break a possible tie (jigo).
Scoring rules[edit]Two general types of scoring system are used, and players determine which to use before play. Both systems almost always give the same result.
Territory scoringcounts the number of empty points a player's stones surround, together with the number of stones the player captured.
Area scoringcounts the number of points a player's stones occupy and surround. It is associated with contemporary Chinese play and was probably established there during theMing Dynastyin the 15th or 16th century.
[58]After both players have passed consecutively, the stones that are still on the board but unable to avoid capture, calleddeadstones, are removed.
Area scoring (including Chinese):A player's score is the number of stones that the player has on the board, plus the number of empty intersections surrounded by that player's stones.
Territory scoring (including Japanese and Korean):In the course of the game, each player retains the stones they capture, termedprisoners. Any dead stones removed at the end of the game become prisoners. The score is the number of empty points enclosed by a player's stones, plus the number of prisoners captured by that player.
[c]If there is disagreement about which stones are dead, then under area scoring rules, the players simply resume play to resolve the matter. The score is computed using the position after the next time the players pass consecutively. Under territory scoring, the rules are considerably more complex; however, in practice, players generally play on, and, once the status of each stone has been determined, return to the position at the time the first two consecutive passes occurred and remove the dead stones. For further information, seeRules of Go.
Given that the number of stones a player has on the board is directly related to the number of prisoners their opponent has taken, the resulting net score, that is, the difference between Black's and White's scores, is identical under both rulesets (unless the players have passed different numbers of times during the course of the game). Thus, the net result given by the two scoring systems rarely differs by more than a point.
[59]Life and death[edit]While not actually mentioned in the rules of Go (at least in simpler rule sets, such as those of New Zealand and the U.S.), the concept of alivinggroup of stones is necessary for a practical understanding of the game.
[60]Examples of eyes (marked). The black groups at the top of the board are alive, as they have at least two eyes. The black groups at the bottom are dead as they only have one eye. The point markedais a false eye, therefore the black group with false eyeais killed by white.
When a group of stones is mostly surrounded and has no options to connect with friendly stones elsewhere, the status of the group is either alive, dead orunsettled. A group of stones is said to be alive if it cannot be captured, even if the opponent is allowed to move first. Conversely, a group of stones is said to be dead if it cannot avoid capture, even if the owner of the group is allowed the first move. Otherwise, the group is said to be unsettled: the defending player can make it alive or the opponent cankillit, depending on who gets to play first.
[60]Aneyeis an empty point or group of points surrounded by a group of stones. If the eye is surrounded by Black stones, White cannot play there unless such a play would take Black's last liberty and capture the Black stones. (Such a move is forbidden according to the suicide rule in most rule sets, but even if not forbidden, such a move would be a useless suicide of a White stone.)If a Black group has two eyes, White can never capture it because White cannot remove both liberties simultaneously. If Black has only one eye, White can capture the Black group by playing in the single eye, removing Black's last liberty. Such a move is not suicide because the Black stones are removed first. In the "Examples of eyes" diagram, all the circled points are eyes. The two black groups in the upper corners are alive, as both have at least two eyes. The groups in the lower corners are dead, as both have only one eye. The group in the lower left may seem to have two eyes, but the surrounded empty point markedais not actually an eye. White can play there and take a black stone. Such a point is often called afalse eye.
[60]Seki (mutual life)[edit]There is an exception to the requirement that a group must have two eyes to be alive, a situation calledseki(ormutual life). Where different colored groups are adjacent and share liberties, the situation may reach a position when neither player wants to move first, because doing so would allow the opponent to capture; in such situations therefore both players' stones remain on the board (in seki). Neither player receives any points for those groups, but at least those groups themselves remain living, as opposed to being captured.
[d]Seki can occur in many ways. The simplest are:In the "Example of seki (mutual life)" diagram, the circled points are liberties shared by both a black and a white group. Neither player wants to play on a circled point, because doing so would allow the opponent to capture. All the other groups in this example, both black and white, are alive with at least two eyes. Seki can result from an attempt by one player to invade and kill a nearly settled group of the other player.
[60]Tactics[edit]In Go,tacticsdeal with immediate fighting between stones, capturing and saving stones, life, death and other issues localized to a specific part of the board. Larger issues, not limited to only part of the board, are referred to asstrategy, and are covered in their own section.
Capturing tactics[edit]There are several tactical constructs aimed at capturing stones.
[61]These are among the first things a player learns after understanding the rules. Recognizing the possibility that stones can be captured using these techniques is an important step forward.
A ladder. Black cannot escape unless the ladder connects to black stones further down the board that will intercept with the ladder or if one of white's pieces have only one liberty.
The most basic technique is theladder.
[62]To capture stones in a ladder, a player uses a constant series of capture threats (atari) to force the opponent into a zigzag pattern as shown in the adjacent diagram. Unless the pattern runs into friendly stones along the way, the stones in the ladder cannot avoid capture. Experienced players recognize the futility of continuing the pattern and play elsewhere.
A net. The chain of three marked black stones cannot escape in any direction.
Another technique to capture stones is the so-callednet,[63]also known by its Japanese name,geta. This refers to a move that loosely surrounds some stones, preventing their escape in all directions. An example is given in the adjacent diagram. It is generally better to capture stones in a net than in a ladder, because a net does not depend on the condition that there are no opposing stones in the way, nor does it allow the opponent to play a strategic ladder breaker.
A snapback. Although Black can capture the white stone by playing at the circled point, the resulting shape for Black has only one liberty (at 1), thus White can then capture the three black stones by playing at1again (snapback).
A third technique to capture stones is thesnapback.
[64]In a snapback, one player allows a single stone to be captured, then immediately plays on the point formerly occupied by that stone; by so doing, the player captures a larger group of their opponent's stones, in effectsnapping backat those stones. An example can be seen on the right. As with the ladder, an experienced player does not play out such a sequence, recognizing the futility of capturing only to be captured back immediately.
Reading ahead[edit]One of the most important skills required for strong tactical play is the ability to read ahead.
[65]Reading ahead includes considering available moves to play, the possible responses to each move, and the subsequent possibilities after each of those responses. Some of the strongest players of the game can read up to 40 moves ahead even in complicated positions.
[66]As explained in the scoring rules, some stone formations can never be captured and are said to be alive, while other stones may be in the position where they cannot avoid being captured and are said to be dead. Much of the practice material available to players of the game comes in the form of life and death problems, also known astsumego.
[67]In such problems, players are challenged to find the vital move sequence that kills a group of the opponent or saves a group of their own. Tsumego are considered an excellent way to train a player's ability at reading ahead,[67]and are available for all skill levels, some posing a challenge even to top players.
Ko fighting[edit]In situations when theKo ruleapplies, a ko fight may occur.
[51]If the player who is prohibited from capture is of the opinion that the capture is important, because it prevents a large group of stones from being captured for instance, the player may play ako threat.
[51]This is a move elsewhere on the board that threatens to make a large profit if the opponent does not respond. If the opponent does respond to the ko threat, the situation on the board has changed, and the prohibition on capturing the ko no longer applies. Thus the player who made the ko threat may now recapture the ko. Their opponent is then in the same situation and can either play a ko threat as well, or concede the ko by simply playing elsewhere. If a player concedes the ko, either because they do not think it important or because there are no moves left that could function as a ko threat, they havelostthe ko, and their opponent may connect the ko.
Instead of responding to a ko threat, a player may also choose toignorethe threat and connect the ko.
[51]They thereby win the ko, but at a cost. The choice of when to respond to a threat and when to ignore it is a subtle one, which requires a player to consider many factors, including how much is gained by connecting, how much is lost by not responding, how many possible ko threats both players have remaining, what the optimal order of playing them is, and what thesize—points lost or gained—of each of the remaining threats is.
[68]Frequently, the winner of the ko fight does not connect the ko but instead captures one of the chains that constituted their opponent's side of the ko.
[51]In some cases, this leads to another ko fight at a neighboring location.
Strategy[edit]Strategy deals with global influence, interaction between distant stones, keeping the whole board in mind during local fights, and other issues that involve the overall game. It is therefore possible to allow a tactical loss when it confers a strategic advantage.
Novices often start by randomly placing stones on the board, as if it were a game of chance. An understanding of how stones connect for greater power develops, and then a few basiccommon opening sequencesmay be understood. Learning the ways of life and death helps in a fundamental way to develop one's strategic understanding ofweak groups.
[e]A player who both plays aggressively and can handle adversity is said to displaykiai, or fighting spirit, in the game.
Basic concepts[edit]Basic strategic aspects include the following:The strategy involved can become very abstract and complex. High-level players spend years improving their understanding of strategy, and a novice may play many hundreds of games against opponents before being able to win regularly.
Opening strategy[edit]In the opening of the game, players usually play and gain territory in the corners of the board first, as the presence of two edges makes it easier for them to surround territory and establish their stones.
[70]From a secure position in a corner, it is possible to lay claim to more territory by extending along the side of the board.
[71]The opening is the most theoretically difficult part of the game and takes a large proportion of professional players' thinking time.
[72][73]The first stone played at a corner of the board is generally placed on the third or fourth line from the edge. Players tend to play on or near the 4-4 star point during the opening. Playing nearer to the edge does not produce enough territory to be efficient, and playing further from the edge does not safely secure the territory.
[74]In the opening, players often play established sequences calledjoseki, which are locally balanced exchanges;[75]however, the joseki chosen should also produce a satisfactory result on a global scale. It is generally advisable to keep a balance between territory and influence. Which of these gets precedence is often a matter of individual taste.
Middlegame and endgame[edit]The middle phase of the game is the most combative, and usually lasts for more than 100 moves. During the middlegame, the players invade each other's territories, and attack formations that lack the necessarytwo eyesfor viability. Such groups may be saved or sacrificed for something more significant on the board.
[76]It is possible that one player may succeed in capturing a large weak group of the opponent's, which often proves decisive and ends the game by a resignation. However, matters may be more complex yet, with major trade-offs, apparently dead groups reviving, and skillful play to attack in such a way as to construct territories rather than kill.
[77]The end of the middlegame and transition to the endgame is marked by a few features. Near the end of a game, play becomes divided into localized fights that do not affect each other,[78]with the exception ofkofights, where before the central area of the board related to all parts of it. No large weak groups are still in serious danger. Moves can reasonably be attributed some definite value, such as 20 points or fewer, rather than simply being necessary to compete. Both players set limited objectives in their plans, in making or destroying territory, capturing or saving stones. These changing aspects of the game usually occur at much the same time, for strong players. In brief, the middlegame switches into the endgame when the concepts of strategy and influence need reassessment in terms of concrete final results on the board.
History[edit]Origin in China[edit]The earliest written reference to the game is generally recognized as the historical annalZuo Zhuan[9][10](c. 4th century BCE),[11]referring to a historical event of 548 BCE. It is also mentioned in Book XVII of theAnalects of Confucius[11]and in two books written byMencius[10][79](c. 3rd century BCE).
[11]In all of these works, the game is referred to asyì(弈). Today, in China, it is known asweiqi(simplified Chinese:围棋;traditional Chinese:圍棋;pinyin:wéiqí;Wade–Giles:wei ch'i),lit.
'encirclement board game'.
Go was originally played on a 17×17 line grid, but a 19×19 grid became standard by the time of theTang Dynasty(618–907).
[10]Legends trace the origin of the game to the mythicalChinese emperorYao(2337–2258 BCE), who was said to have had his counselorShundesign it for his unruly son,Danzhu, to favorably influence him.
[80]Other theories suggest that the game was derived from Chinese tribal warlords and generals, who used pieces of stone to map out attacking positions.
[81][82]In China, Go was considered one of thefour cultivated artsof theChinese scholar gentleman, along withcalligraphy,paintingand playing the musical instrumentguqin[83]In ancient times the rules of go were passed on verbally, rather than being written down.
[84]Model of a 19×19 Go board, from a tomb of theSui dynasty(581–618 CE).
Painting of a woman playing Go, from theAstana Graves. Tang dynasty, circa 744 CE.
Li Jingplaying Go with his brothers. Detail from a painting byZhou Wenju(fl. 942-961 CE),Southern Tangdynasty.
Spread to Korea and Japan[edit]Go was introduced to Korea sometime between the 5th and 7th centuries CE, and was popular among the higher classes. In Korea, the game is calledbaduk(hangul:바둑), and a variant of the game calledSunjang badukwas developed by the 16th century. Sunjang baduk became the main variant played in Korea until the end of the 19th century, when the current version was reintroduced from Japan.
[85][86]The game reached Japan in the 7th century CE—where it is calledgo(碁)origo(囲碁). It became popular at theJapanese imperial courtin the 8th century,[87]and among the general public by the 13th century.
[88]The game was further formalized in the 15th century. In 1603,Tokugawa Ieyasure-established Japan's unified national government. In the same year, he assigned the then-best player in Japan, aBuddhistmonk named Nikkai (né Kanō Yosaburo, 1559), to the post ofGodokoro(Minister of Go).
[89]Nikkai took the nameHon'inbō Sansaand founded theHon'inbōGo school.
[89]Severalcompeting schoolswere founded soon after.
[89]These officially recognized and subsidized Go schools greatly developed the level of play and introduced thedan/kyu style systemof ranking players.
[90]Players from the four schools (Hon'inbō, Yasui, Inoue and Hayashi) competed in the annualcastle games, played in the presence of theshōgun.
[91]Detail from a Japanese illustratedhandscrollofThe Tale of Genji.
Heian period, 12th century CE.
A Korean couple playing Go in traditional dress. Photographed between 1910 and 1920.
Internationalization[edit]Despite its widespread popularity in East Asia, Go has been slow to spread to the rest of the world. Although there are some mentions of the game in western literature from the 16th century forward, Go did not start to become popular in the West until the end of the 19th century, when German scientistOskar Korscheltwrote a treatise on theancient Han Chinesegame.
[92]By the early 20th century, Go had spread throughout theGermanandAustro-Hungarianempires. In 1905,Edward Laskerlearned the game while in Berlin. When he moved to New York, Lasker founded the New York Go Club together with (amongst others) Arthur Smith, who had learned of the game in Japan while touring the East and had published the bookThe Game of Goin 1908.
[93]Lasker's bookGo and Go-moku(1934) helped spread the game throughout the U.S.,[93]and in 1935, theAmerican Go Associationwas formed. Two years later, in 1937, the German Go Association was founded.
World War II put a stop to most Go activity, since it was a popular game in Japan, but after the war, Go continued to spread.
[94]For most of the 20th century, theJapan Go Association (Nihon Ki-in)played a leading role in spreading Go outside East Asia by publishing the English-language magazineGo Reviewin the 1960s, establishingGo centersin the U.S., Europe and South America, and often sending professional teachers on tour to Western nations.
[95]Internationally, the game had been commonly known since the start of the twentieth century by its shortened Japanese name, andterms for common Go conceptsare derived from their Japanese pronunciation.
In 1996,NASAastronautDaniel Barryand Japanese astronautKoichi Wakatabecame the first people to play Go in space. They used a special Go set, which was named Go Space, designed by Wai-Cheung Willson Chow. Both astronauts were awarded honorarydan ranksby theNihon Ki-in.
[96]As of December 2015[update], theInternational Go Federationhas 75 member countries, with 67 member countries outside East Asia.
[97]Chinese cultural centres across the world are promoting Go, and cooperating with local Go associations, for example the seminars held by the Chinese cultural centre in Tel Aviv, Israel together with the Israeli Go association.
[98]Competitive play[edit]Ranks and ratings[edit]In Go, rank indicates a player's skill in the game. Traditionally, ranks are measured usingkyuanddangrades,[99]a system also adopted by manymartial arts. More recently, mathematical rating systems similar to theElo rating systemhave been introduced.
[100]Such rating systems often provide a mechanism for converting a rating to a kyu or dan grade.
[100]Kyu grades (abbreviatedk) are considered student grades and decrease as playing level increases, meaning 1st kyu is the strongest available kyu grade. Dan grades (abbreviatedd) are considered master grades, and increase from 1st dan to 7th dan.
First danequals ablack beltin eastern martial arts using this system. The difference among each amateur rank is one handicap stone. For example, if a 5k plays a game with a 1k, the 5k would need a handicap of four stones to even the odds. Top-level amateur players sometimes defeat professionals in tournament play.
[101]Professional players haveprofessional dan ranks(abbreviatedp). These ranks are separate from amateur ranks.
The rank system comprises, from the lowest to highest ranks:Tournament and match rules[edit]Tournament and match rules deal with factors that may influence the game but are not part of the actual rules of play. Such rules may differ between events. Rules that influence the game include: the setting of compensation points (komi), handicap, and time control parameters. Rules that do not generally influence the game are: the tournament system, pairing strategies, and placement criteria.
Common tournament systems used in Go include theMcMahon system,[102]Swiss system,league systemsand theknockout system. Tournaments may combine multiple systems; manyprofessional Go tournamentsuse a combination of the league and knockout systems.
[103]Tournament rules may also set the following:Time control[edit]A game of Go may be timed using agame clock. Formal time controls were introduced into the professional game during the 1920s and were controversial.
[106]Adjournments andsealed movesbegan to be regulated in the 1930s. Go tournaments use a number of different time control systems. All common systems envisage a single main period of time for each player for the game, but they vary on the protocols for continuation (inovertime) after a player has finished that time allowance.
[g]The most widely used time control system is the so-calledbyoyomi[h]system. The top professional Go matches have timekeepers so that the players do not have to press their own clocks.
Two widely used variants of the byoyomi system are:[107]Notation and recording games[edit]Go games are recorded with a simple coordinate system. This is comparable toalgebraic chess notation, except that Go stones do not move and thus require only one coordinate per turn. Coordinate systems include purely numerical (4-4 point), hybrid (K3), and purely alphabetical.
[108]TheSmart Game Formatuses alphabetical coordinates internally, but most editors represent the board with hybrid coordinates as this reduces confusion. The Japanese wordkifuis sometimes used to refer to a game record.
In Unicode, Go stones can be represented with black and white circles from the blockGeometric Shapes:The blockMiscellaneous Symbolsincludes "Go markers"[109]that were likely meant for mathematical research of Go:[110][111]Top players and professional Go[edit]A Go professional is a professional player of the game of Go. There are six areas with professional go associations, these are: China (Chinese Weiqi Association), Japan (Nihon Ki-in,Kansai Ki-in), South Korea (Korea Baduk Association), Taiwan (Taiwan Chi Yuan Culture Foundation), the United States (AGA Professional System) and Europe (European Professional System).
Although the game was developed in China, the establishment of theFour Go housesbyTokugawa Ieyasuat the start of the 17th century shifted the focus of the Go world to Japan. State sponsorship, allowing players to dedicate themselves full-time to study of the game, and fierce competition between individual houses resulted in a significant increase in the level of play. During this period, the best player of his generation was given the prestigious titleMeijin(master) and the post ofGodokoro(minister of Go). Of special note are the players who were dubbedKisei(Go Sage). The only three players to receive this honor wereDōsaku,JōwaandShūsaku, all of the houseHon'inbō.
[112]After the end of theTokugawa shogunateand theMeiji Restorationperiod, the Go houses slowly disappeared, and in 1924, theNihon Ki-in(Japanese Go Association) was formed. Top players from this period often played newspaper-sponsored matches of 2–10 games.
[113]Of special note are the (Chinese-born) playerGo Seigen(Chinese: Wu Qingyuan), who scored 80% in these matches and beat down most of his opponents to inferior handicaps,[114]andMinoru Kitani, who dominated matches in the early 1930s.
[115]These two players are also recognized for their groundbreaking work on newopening theory(Shinfuseki).
[116]For much of the 20th century, Go continued to be dominated by players trained in Japan. Notable names includedEio Sakata,Rin Kaiho(born in Taiwan),Masao Kato,Koichi KobayashiandCho Chikun(born Cho Ch'i-hun, from South Korea).
[117]Top Chinese and Korean talents often moved to Japan, because the level of play there was high and funding was more lavish. One of the first Korean players to do so wasCho Namchul, who studied in theKitani Dojo1937–1944. After his return to Korea, theHanguk Kiwon(Korea Baduk Association) was formed and caused the level of play in South Korea to rise significantly in the second half of the 20th century.
[118]In China, the game declined during theCultural Revolution(1966–1976) but quickly recovered in the last quarter of the 20th century, bringing Chinese players, such asNie WeipingandMa Xiaochun, on par with their Japanese and South Korean counterparts.
[119]TheChinese Weiqi Association(today part of the China Qiyuan) was established in 1962, and professional dan grades started being issued in 1982.
[120]Western professional Go began in 2012 with the American Go Association's Professional System.
[121]In 2014, the European Go Federation followed suit and started their professional system.
[122]With the advent of major international titles from 1989 onward, it became possible to compare the level of players from different countries more accurately.
Cho Hunhyunof South Korea won the first edition of the QuadrennialIng Cupin 1989. His discipleLee Chang-howas the dominant player in international Go competitions for more than a decade spanning much of 1990s and early 2000s; he is also credited with groundbreaking works on the endgame. Cho, Lee and other South Korean players such asSeo Bong-soo,Yoo ChanghyukandLee Sedolbetween them won the majority of international titles in this period.
[123]Several Chinese players also rose to the top in international Go from 2000s, most notablyMa Xiaochun,Chang Hao,Gu LiandKe Jie. As of 2016[update], Japan lags behind in the international Go scene.
Historically, more men than women have played Go. Special tournaments for women exist, but until recently, men and women did not compete together at the highest levels; however, the creation of new, open tournaments and the rise of strong female players, most notablyRui Naiwei, have in recent years highlighted the strength and competitiveness of emerging female players.
[124]The level in other countries has traditionally been much lower, except for some players who had preparatory professional training in East Asia.
[k]Knowledge of the game has been scant elsewhere up until the 20th century. A famous player of the 1920s wasEdward Lasker.
[l]It was not until the 1950s that more than a few Western players took up the game as other than a passing interest. In 1978,Manfred Wimmerbecame the first Westerner to receive a professional player's certificate from an East Asian professional Go association.
[125]In 2000, AmericanMichael Redmondbecame the first Western player to achieve a 9 dan rank.
Equipment[edit]It is possible to play Go with a simple paper board and coins, plastic tokens, or white beans and coffee beans for the stones; or even by drawing the stones on the board and erasing them when captured. More popular midrange equipment includes cardstock, alaminatedparticle board, or wood boards with stones of plastic or glass. More expensive traditional materials are still used by many players. The most expensive Go sets have black stones carved from slate and white stones carved from translucent white shells, played on boards carved in a single piece from the trunk of a tree.
Traditional equipment[edit]Boards[edit]TheGo board(generally referred to by its Japanese namegoban碁盤) typically measures between 45 and 48 cm (18 and 19 in) in length (from one player's side to the other) and.mw-parser-output .frac{white-space:nowrap}.mw-parser-output .frac .num,.mw-parser-output .frac .den{font-size:80%;line-height:0;vertical-align:super}.mw-parser-output .frac .den{vertical-align:sub}.mw-parser-output .sr-only{border:0;clip:rect(0,0,0,0);height:1px;margin:-1px;overflow:hidden;padding:0;position:absolute;width:1px}42 to 44 cm (16+1⁄2to17+1⁄4in) in width. Chinese boards are slightly larger, as a traditional Chinese Go stone is slightly larger to match. The board is not square; there is a 15:14 ratio in length to width, because with a perfectly square board, from the player's viewing angle the perspective creates a foreshortening of the board. The added length compensates for this.
[126]There are two main types of boards: a table board similar in most respects to other gameboards like that used for chess, and a floor board, which is its own free-standing table and at which the players sit.
The traditional Japanesegobanis between 10 and 18 cm (3.9 and 7.1 in) thick and has legs; it sits on the floor (see picture).
[126]It is preferably made from the rare golden-tingedKayatree (Torreya nucifera), with the very best made from Kaya trees up to 700 years old. More recently, the relatedCalifornia Torreya(Torreya californica) has been prized for its light color and pale rings as well as its reduced expense and more readily available stock. The natural resources of Japan have been unable to keep up with the enormous demand for the slow-growing Kaya trees; bothT. nuciferaandT. californicatake many hundreds of years to grow to the necessary size, and they are now extremely rare, raising the price of such equipment tremendously.
[127]As Kaya trees are a protected species in Japan, they cannot be harvested until they have died. Thus, an old-growth, floor-standing Kayagobancan easily cost in excess of$10,000 with the highest-quality examples costing more than $60,000.
[128]Other, less expensive woods often used to make quality table boards in both Chinese and Japanese dimensions includeHiba(Thujopsis dolabrata),Katsura(Cercidiphyllum japonicum),Kauri(Agathis), and Shin Kaya (various varieties ofspruce, commonly from Alaska, Siberia and China'sYunnan Province).
[127]So-calledShin Kayais a potentially confusing merchant's term:shinmeans 'new', and thusshin kayais best translated 'faux kaya', because the woods so described are biologically unrelated to Kaya.
[127]Stones[edit]A full set of Go stones (goishi) usually contains 181 black stones and 180 white ones; a 19×19 grid has 361 points, so there are enough stones to cover the board, and Black gets the extra odd stone because that player goes first. However it may happen, especially in beginners' games, that many back-and-forth captures empty the bowls before the end of the game: in that case an exchange of prisoners allows the game to continue.
Traditional Japanese stones are double-convex, and made ofclamshell(white) andslate(black).
[129]The classic slate is nachiguro stone mined inWakayama Prefectureand the clamshell from the Hamaguri clam; however, due to a scarcity in the Japanese supply of this clam, the stones are most often made of shells harvested fromMexico.
[129]Historically, the most prized stones were made ofjade, often given to the reigning emperor as a gift.
[129]In China, the game is traditionally played with single-convex stones[129]made of a composite calledYunzi. The material comes from Yunnan Province and is made bysinteringa proprietary and trade-secret mixture of mineral compounds derived from the local stone. This process dates to the Tang Dynasty and, after the knowledge was lost in the 1920s during theChinese Civil War, was rediscovered in the 1960s by the now state-run Yunzi company. The material is praised for its colors, its pleasing sound as compared to glass or to synthetics such asmelamine, and its lower cost as opposed to other materials such as slate/shell. The termyunzican also refer to a single-convex stone made of any material; however, most English-language Go suppliers specify Yunzi as a material and single-convex as a shape to avoid confusion, as stones made of Yunzi are also available in double-convex while synthetic stones can be either shape.
Traditional stones are made so that black stones are slightly larger in diameter than white; this is to compensate for the optical illusion created by contrasting colors that would make equal-sized white stones appear larger on the board than black stones.
[129][m]Bowls[edit]The bowls for the stones are shaped like a flattened sphere with a level underside.
[130]The lid is loose fitting and upturned before play to receive stones captured during the game. Chinese bowls are slightly larger, and a little more rounded, a style known generally asGo Seigen; JapaneseKitanibowls tend to have a shape closer to that of the bowl of asnifterglass, such as forbrandy. The bowls are usually made of turned wood.
Mulberryis the traditional material for Japanese bowls, but is very expensive; wood from the Chinesejujubedate tree, which has a lighter color (it is often stained) and slightly more visible grain pattern, is a common substitute for rosewood, and traditional for Go Seigen-style bowls. Other traditional materials used for making Chinese bowls includelacqueredwood,ceramics, stone and woven straw orrattan. The names of the bowl shapes,Go SeigenandKitani, were introduced in the last quarter of the 20th century by the professional playerJanice Kimas homage to two 20th-century professional Go players by the same names, of Chinese and Japanese nationality, respectively, who are referred to as the "Fathers of modern Go".
[112]Playing technique and etiquette[edit]The traditional way to place a Go stone is to first take one from the bowl, gripping it between the index and middle fingers, with the middle finger on top, and then placing it directly on the desired intersection.
[131]One can also place a stone on the board and then slide it into position under appropriate circumstances (where it does not move any other stones). It is considered respectful towards White for Black to place the first stone of the game in the upper right-hand corner.
[132](Because of symmetry, this has no effect on the game's outcome.)It is considered poor manners to run one's fingers through one's bowl of unplayed stones, as the sound, however soothing to the player doing this, can be disturbing to one's opponent. Similarly, clacking a stone against another stone, the board, or the table or floor is also discouraged. However, it is permissible to emphasize select moves by striking the board more firmly than normal, thus producing a sharp clack. Additionally, hovering one's arm over the board (usually when deciding where to play) is also considered rude as it obstructs the opponent's view of the board.
Manners and etiquette are extensively discussed in 'The Classic of WeiQi in Thirteen Chapters', aSong dynastymanual to the game. Apart from the points above it also points to the need to remain calm and honorable, in maintaining posture, and knowing the key specialised terms, such as titles of common formations. Generally speaking, much attention is paid to the etiquette of playing, as much as to winning or actual game technique.
Computers and Go[edit]Nature of the game[edit]Incombinatorial game theoryterms, Go is azero-sum,perfect-information,partisan,deterministicstrategy game, putting it in the same class as chess,draughts(checkers), andReversi(Othello); however it differs from these in its game play. Although the rules are simple, the practical strategy is complex.
The game emphasizes the importance of balance on multiple levels: to secure an area of the board, it is good to play moves close together; however, to cover the largest area, one needs to spread out, perhaps leaving weaknesses that can be exploited. Playing toolow(close to the edge) secures insufficient territory and influence, yet playing toohigh(far from the edge) allows the opponent to invade. Decisions in one part of the board may be influenced by an apparently unrelated situation in a distant part of the board (for example, ladders can be broken by stones at an arbitrary distance away). Thus plays made early in the game can shape the nature of conflict a hundred moves later.
Thegame complexityof Go is such that describing even elementary strategy fills many introductory books. In fact, numerical estimates show that the number of possible games of Go far exceedsthe number of atoms in the observable universe.
[n]Research ofgo endgamebyJohn H. Conwayled to the invention of thesurreal numbers.
[133]Go also contributed to development ofcombinatorial game theory(with Go Infinitesimals[134]being a specific example of its use in Go).
Software players[edit]Go long posed a daunting challenge tocomputer programmers, putting forward "difficult decision-making tasks, an intractable search space, and an optimal solution so complex it appears infeasible to directly approximate using a policy or value function".
[135]Prior to 2015,[135]the best Go programs only managed to reachamateur danlevel.
[136]On smaller 9×9 and 13x13 boards, computer programs fared better, and were able to compare to professional players. Many in the field ofartificial intelligenceconsider Go to require more elements that mimic human thought thanchess.
[137]The reasons why computer programs had not played Go at theprofessional danlevel prior to 2016 include:[138]As an illustration, the greatest handicap normally given to a weaker opponent is 9 stones. It was not until August 2008 that a computer won a game against a professional level player at this handicap. It was the Mogo program, which scored this first victory in an exhibition game played during the US Go Congress.
[142][143]By 2013, a win at the professional level of play was accomplished with a four-stone advantage.
[144][145]In October 2015,Google DeepMind's programAlphaGobeatFan Hui, the European Go champion and a2 dan(out of 9 dan possible) professional,five times out of fivewith no handicap on a full size 19×19 board.
[135]AlphaGo used a fundamentally different paradigm than earlier Go programs; it included very little direct instruction, and mostly useddeep learningwhere AlphaGo played itself in hundreds of millions of games such that it could measure positions more intuitively. In March 2016, Google next challengedLee Sedol, a 9 dan considered the top player in the world in the early 21st century,[146]to afive-game match. Leading up to the game, Lee Sedol and other top professionals were confident that he would win;[147]however, AlphaGo defeated Lee in four of the five games.
[148][149]After having already lost the series by the third game, Lee won the fourth game, describing his win as "invaluable".
[150]In May 2017, AlphaGo beatKe Jie, who at the time continuously held the world No. 1 ranking for two years,[151][152]winning each game in athree-game matchduring theFuture of Go Summit.
[153][154]In October 2017,DeepMindannounced a significantly stronger version calledAlphaGo Zerowhich beat the previous version by 100 games to 0.
[155]Software assistance[edit]An abundance of software is available to support players of the game. This includes programs that can be used to view or edit game records and diagrams, programs that allow the user to search for patterns in the games of strong players, and programs that allow users to play against each other over the Internet.
Some web servers[citation needed]provide graphical aids like maps, to aid learning during play. These graphical aids may suggest possible next moves, indicate areas of influence, highlight vital stones under attack and mark stones in atari or about to be captured.
There are several file formats used to store game records, the most popular of which is SGF, short forSmart Game Format. Programs used for editing game records allow the user to record not only the moves, but also variations, commentary and further information on the game.
[p]Electronic databases can be used to study life and death situations,joseki,fusekiand games by a particular player. Programs are available that give players pattern searching options, which allow players to research positions by searching for high-level games in which similar situations occur. Such software generally lists common follow-up moves that have been played by professionals and gives statistics on win–loss ratio in opening situations.
Internet-basedGo serversallow access to competition with players all over the world, for real-time and turn-based games.
[q]Such servers also allow easy access to professional teaching, with both teaching games and interactive game review being possible.
[r]In popular culture[edit]Apart from technical literature and study material, Go and its strategies have been the subject of several works of fiction, such asThe Master of GobyNobel prize-winning authorYasunari Kawabata[s]andThe Girl Who Played Goby Shan Sa. Other books have used Go as athemeor minor plot device. For example, the novelShibumibyTrevaniancenters around the game and uses Go metaphors.
[156][157]Go features prominently in theChung Kuoseries of novels byDavid Wingrove, being the favourite game of the main villain.
[158]Themanga(Japanese comic book) andanimeseriesHikaru no Go, released in Japan in 1998, had a large impact in popularizing Go among young players, both in Japan and—as translations were released—abroad.
[159][160]Go Playeris a similar animated series about young Go players that aired in China.
Similarly, Go has been used as a subject or plot device in film, such asπ,A Beautiful Mind,Tron: Legacy, andThe Go Master, abiopicof Go professionalGo Seigen.
[161][t]2013'sTôkyô ni kita bakariorTokyo Newcomerportrays a Chinese foreigner Go player moving to Tokyo.
[162]InKing Hu'swuxiafilmThe Valiant Ones, the characters are color-coded as Go stones (black or other dark shades for the Chinese, white for the Japanese invaders), Go boards and stones are used by the characters to keep track of soldiers prior to battle, and the battles themselves are structured like a game of Go.
[163]Go has also been featured in a number of television series.
Starz'sscience fictionthrillerCounterpart, for instance, is rich in references (the opening itself featuring developments on a Go board), including applications of the game's metaphors, a book about life and death being displayed, and Go matches, accurately played, relevant to the plot.
[164]Another example isSyfy's12 Monkeys: In the first season's episodeAtari, one of the characters explains the homonymous concept, using it as an analogy to the situation he was facing, and his son is briefly seen playing Go later on.
[164]InReply 1988one of the main characters, Choi Taek, is a professional Go player. A sci-fi TV series calledAndromedahas the main protagonist Captain Dylan Hunt learn Go to help learn the true nature of his opponent.
The corporation and brandAtariwas named after theGo term.
[165]Hedge fund managerMark Spitznagelused Go as his main investing metaphor in his investing bookThe Dao of Capital.
[166]The Way of Go: 8 Ancient Strategy Secrets for Success in Business and Lifeby Troy Anderson applies Go strategy to business.
[167]GO: An Asian Paradigm for Business Strategy[168]by Miura Yasuyuki, a manager with Japan Airlines,[169]uses Go to describe the thinking and behavior of business men.
Psychology[edit]A 2004 review of literature byFernand Gobet, de Voogt and Jean Retschitzki shows that relatively little scientific research has been carried out on thepsychologyof Go, compared with other traditional board games such aschess.
[170]Computer Go research has shown that given the large search tree, knowledge and pattern recognition are more important in Go than in other strategy games, such as chess.
[170]A study of the effects of age on Go-playing[171]has shown that mental decline is milder with strong players than with weaker players. According to the review of Gobet and colleagues, the pattern of brain activity observed with techniques such asPETandfMRIdoes not show large differences between Go and chess. On the other hand, a study by Xiangchuan Chen et al.
[172]showed greater activation in the right hemisphere among Go players than among chess players. There is some evidence to suggest a correlation between playing board games and reduced risk ofAlzheimer's diseaseanddementia.
[173]Science[edit]In formalgame theoryterms, Go is a non-chance,combinatorial gamewith perfect information. Informally that means there are no dice used (and decisions or moves create discrete outcome vectors rather than probability distributions), the underlying math is combinatorial, and all moves (via single vertex analysis) are visible to both players (unlike some card games where some information is hidden). Perfect information also implies sequence—players can theoretically know about all past moves.
Other game theoretical taxonomy elements include the facts that Go is bounded (because every game must end with a victor (or a tie) within a finite number of moves); the strategy is associative (every strategy is a function of board position); format is non-cooperative (not a team sport); positions are extensible (can be represented by board position trees); game iszero-sum(player choices do not increase resources available–colloquially, rewards in the game are fixed and if one player wins, the other loses) and the utility function is restricted (in the sense of win/lose; however, ratings, monetary rewards, national and personal pride and other factors can extend utility functions, but generally not to the extent of removing the win/lose restriction).
Affine transformationscan theoretically add non-zero and complex utility aspects even to two player games.
[174]In the endgame, it can often happen that the state of the board consists of several subpositions that do not interact with the others. The whole board position can then be considered as a mathematical sum, or composition, of the individual subpositions.
[175]It is this property of go endgames that ledJohn Horton Conwayto the discovery ofsurreal numbers.
[133]Comparisons[edit]Go begins with an empty board. It is focused on building from the ground up (nothing to something) with multiple, simultaneous battles leading to a point-based win. Chess is tactical rather than strategic, as the predetermined strategy is to trap one individual piece (the king). This comparison has also been applied to military and political history, withScott Boorman's bookThe Protracted Game(1969) and, more recently,Robert Greene's bookThe 48 Laws of Power(1998) exploring the strategy of theChinese Communist Partyin theChinese Civil Warthrough the lens of Go.
[176][177]A similar comparison has been drawn among Go,chessandbackgammon, perhaps the three oldest games that enjoy worldwide popularity.
[178]Backgammon is a "man vs. fate" contest, with chance playing a strong role in determining the outcome. Chess, with rows of soldiers marching forward to capture each other, embodies the conflict of "man vs. man". Because the handicap system tells Go players where they stand relative to other players, an honestly ranked player can expect to lose about half of their games; therefore, Go can be seen as embodying the quest for self-improvement, "man vs. self".
[178]See also[edit]Notes[edit]References[edit]Citations[edit]Sources[edit]Further reading[edit]Introductory books[edit]Historical interest[edit]External links[edit]Navigation menuSearch
