old id = 2886
Italy’s failed digital democracy dream is a warning | WIRED UK
2016
https://www.wired.co.uk/article/italy-five-star-rousseau-online

Michele BarberoItaly’s failed digital democracy dream is a warningThe Five Star Movement (5SM), wanted to upend Italian politics with its revolutionary plans for digital direct democracy. Over the past few months, instead, it almost managed to upend itself, stuck in a kafkaesque drama that left its online voting platform paralysed.
The anti-establishment party, founded in the late 2000s by comedian Beppe Grillo and digital entrepreneur Gianroberto Casaleggio, prided itself on reconciling with politics thousands of disenfranchised citizens, giving them a say on strategic decisions and in the selection of candidates by means of frequent online votes.
But over the past two months its internal processes have been disrupted by a painful divorce with the association that owns Rousseau, the web platform (named after the Genevan political philosopher and theorist of direct democracy) where the 5SM used to hold its ballots and debates. The end of a long stalemate between the party and the platform, this week, provided some respite – but questions remain on whether the party’s online democracy utopia can ever be revived.
In many ways, the row resembled an Italianopera buffarather than a political showdown over the future of participatory democracy. The Rousseau association, founded by Gianroberto Casaleggio and his son Davide – now the president following Gianroberto’s death in 2016 – had long been complaining that many Five Star elected officials had stopped paying, with the blessing of their leaders, the €300 (£260) monthly quotas that accounted for much of its revenue. The organisation claimed that the total back fees amounted to about €450,000 (£388,000), a figure that the 5SM rejected, arguing that it had been calculated including representatives that had long left the party, and billing for services it had never asked for.
As the dispute escalated, in April 2021 the platform officially stopped serving as the movement’s digital arena, blocking its internal political life at the worst possible moment. Since March, the 5SM has a new prospective leader, former Italian PM Giuseppe Conte, anointed by Grillo to reorganise and reinvigorate a party worn out by three rocky years in government. But in keeping with the Five Star tradition, Conte’s leadership and political programme will have to be sanctioned via online votes. The standstill made that vote impossible, leaving Conte in a bizarre limbo.
A crucial point of contention was the control over the personal data of the thousands of members registered on Rousseau. The Movement said it needed those contact details, lest it be forced to rebuild the membership base from scratch when it adopts an alternative platform, but Casaleggio long refused to turn the data in, claiming that the party lacked a legal representative. The matter was finally settled through a ruling by Italy’s Data Protection Authority last week, which ordered Rousseau to hand over the database. In a Facebook post,Conte saidthat a deal had been reached with Casaleggio over the back fees, and hailed the latest development as “a new course” for the Movement.
But the end of the 5SM’s relationship with Rousseau, which used to be labeled as its “operating system,” represents a major shift in itself – and speaks volumes about the actual prospects of the technopopulist dream the party used to tout.
The internet has always been a key component of the Five Star’s strategy. Since the early days, Beppe Grillo’s blog has been essential to motivate what he called “the people of the web”, and shape party lines. In the years leading up to the movement's launch in 2009, activists got organised via Meetup, a social network designed to connect users with similar interests or causes. These Meetup groups ended up including thousands of people, and also helped create the first local candidacies of what would later become the Five Star Movement.
While the 5SM had already been holding online ballots in previous years, Rousseau was officially launched in 2016, on the same day of its creator Gianroberto Casaleggio’s death. One of the most complex platforms of its kind, it provided the Five Star with a variety of tools, allowing subscribers to participate in the writing of national and local bills, vote in primary elections and referendums, as well as receive online training and legal support. According to itshomepage, it currently has some 195,000 certified users, 112,000 of whom with voting rights, and has hosted over 340 consultations, with tens of thousands of people taking part in the most crucial ones.
Within the movement, many are still keen to stress Rousseau’s merits. “Ten years ago, Italy was trapped in conflicts between parties that responded more to interest groups than to the citizens’ needs,” said Tiziana Beghin, head of the 5SM group in the European Parliament, days before the end of the gridlock. “We have freed Italy thanks to direct democracy: thanks to our platform, politicians have been chosen directly by citizens, rather than being selected from the top by a leader or a small group of cadres, as is the case with the other parties”However, some observers argue that as the movement gradually turns into a more mainstream party, digital direct democracy has in fact become less of a priority – a fact which has contributed to sparking the conflict with Rousseau.
Once a maverick force that rejected any alliance with other political parties, since its election victory in 2018 the 5SM has constantly been in government in a variety of coalitions: first with the far-right League, then with the social democratic PD, and, since February, as part of Mario Draghi’s national unity government.
For the Five Star, these years in power have been marked by some significant achievements, particularly the approval by Parliament of an ambitious basic income scheme – one of the 5SM’s flagship policies. But supporters have also had to swallow many bitter compromises, as the movement teamed up with parties it used to lambast. It is currently polling at around 15 percent, a far cry from the 32 percent it won when it swept to power in 2018.
“The direct democracy project was the brainchild of Gianroberto Casaleggio,” says Roberto D’Alimonte, a politics professor at LUISS University in Rome. “His death five years ago spelled the demise, and now the end, of this connotation of the Five Star Movement. Beppe Grillo is not really interested in this aspect, nor is Mr Conte. So the future of the Five Star is away from this notion of direct democracy.”D’Alimonte expects online consultations to remain part of the Movement’s political life, but in a curtailed, less binding role, alongside a more traditional structure and decision-making process. A scenario that could hardly go down well with Rousseau and its handler, Davide Casaleggio, who “wants to defend the legacy of his father,” says D’Alimonte.
Casaleggio announced over the weekend that he is quitting the party: “This isn’t the Movement anymore,”he wrote: “I’m sure my father wouldn’t recognise it.”Even in its heyday, however, the Five Star’s model of digital direct democracy was controversial. A first set of concerns has to do with the several security breaches suffered by Rousseau. In 2017, a black-hat hacker announced they had broken into the platform and put its entire database on sale for 0.3 bitcoins (roughly £860 at the time). The Italian Data Protection Authority established that Rousseau had been using an obsolete version of a proprietary management system, which made it particularly vulnerable to cyberattacks. Rousseau says the platform has since been rewritten following the highest security standards.
Critics have also questioned the democratic nature of the online processes that took place on Rousseau, arguing that deliberations and qualitative contributions to the writing of bills have been marginal compared to online votes. Such polls often boiled down to binary, yes/no referendums, which almost never failed to rubber stamp by a landslide the option favoured by the party’s leadership.
It has been calculatedthat, out of over 40 online referendums held by the 5SM by early 2019, only in two instances the majority of participants went against the top brass’s will.
Despite the Five Star’s mantra that everyone matters the same, in some ways the system they put in place brings to mind the plebiscites through which Napoleon Bonaparte legitimised his authoritarian rule in the early 19th century, rather than the polls held by the citizens’ assembly in Pericles’s Athens.
Leaders have been accused of manipulating the base, including with the wording used in the consultations. Last February, when members were asked if the 5SM should back the new government led by Mario Draghi, the question stressed that the new cabinet would “defend the Movement’s main achievements.” Unsurprisingly, almost 60 percent of participants gave the green light to the new coalition. In several other cases, the winning choice received over 90 percent of the votes.
Aside from the Five Star’s shortcomings and latest woes, however, citizens' direct participation in party politics by means of digital tools is likely to pick up pace in the near future. “We are going to see more and more the use of the internet to delegate powers to party members", says D’Alimonte: “The internet is changing the functioning of democracy, we are just at the beginning.”The 5SM was only one of a string of “digital parties” rising across the world. In Spain, left-wing Podemos has also adopted a Rousseau-style platform where its members can debate and vote, and comparable online tools have been used by the radical-left France Unbowed. Mainstream social democratic parties such as the PSOE in Spain, the SPD in Germany and Labour in Britain have also begun to experiment with forms of electronic participation in their internal processes. InTaiwan, government-sponsored hackers have come up with new ways of including the public in policy making, such as online platforms that make it easier for users to reach consensus around actionable proposals.
Even EU institutions, routinely dismissed as plodding bureaucratic machines, are showing a similar pattern. Five Star MEP Mario Furore cites the Conference on the Future of Europe – a forum which uses a multilingual online platform for citizens to share their idea – as evidence that the Movement’s model “is spreading to the whole of Europe.”“Our experience is proof of how the internet has made the established parties, and the previous organisational model of democratic politics more generally, obsolete and uneconomic,” Davide Casaleggiosaida couple of years back. A digital democracy revolution seems indeed to be underway, and the Five Star, as it launches its “new course,” can finally be part of it again. But the Movement may not be so keen to spearhead it anymore.
Digital Society is a digital magazine exploring how technology is changing society. It’s produced as a publishing partnership with Vontobel, but all content is editorially independent.
Visit Vontobel Impactfor more stories on how technology is shaping the future of society.
© Condé Nast Britain 2022.
