old id = 1630
CELLULAR DNA REPLICASES: Components and Dynamics at the Replication Fork | Annual Review of Biochemistry
2002
https://doi.org/10.1146%2Fannurev.biochem.73.011303.073859

CELLULAR DNA REPLICASES: Components and Dynamics at the Replication ForkCELLULAR DNA REPLICASES: Components and Dynamics at the Replication ForkAnnual Review of BiochemistryVol. 74:283-315 (Volume publication date 7 July 2005)https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.biochem.73.011303.073859Aaron Johnson2and Mike O'Donnell1,21Howard Hughes Medical Institute,2The Rockefeller University, New York City, New York 10021-6399; email:[email protected],[email protected]Abstract▪ AbstractChromosomal DNA replicases are multicomponent machines that have evolved clever strategies to perform their function. Although the structure of DNA is elegant in its simplicity, the job of duplicating it is far from simple. At the heart of the replicase machinery is a heteropentameric AAA+ clamp-loading machine that couples ATP hydrolysis to load circular clamp proteins onto DNA. The clamps encircle DNA and hold polymerases to the template for processive action. Clamp-loader and sliding clamp structures have been solved in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic systems. The heteropentameric clamp loaders are circular oligomers, reflecting the circular shape of their respective clamp substrates. Clamps and clamp loaders also function in other DNA metabolic processes, including repair, checkpoint mechanisms, and cell cycle progression. Twin polymerases and clamps coordinate their actions with a clamp loader and yet other proteins to form a replisome machine that advances the replication fork.
Key WordsDNA replication,DNA sliding clamps,DNA polymerase,processivity clamp loader,protein-DNA interactionsINTRODUCTIONChromosomal DNAs are exceedingly large molecules, and the vast repository of information they hold must be duplicated with precision [see (1) for overview]. The sheer size of these molecules may explain why all cells utilize a clamp loader to position a circular sliding clamp on DNA that tethers the DNA polymerases to their long substrates for highly processive synthesis (seeFigure 1). The eukaryotic proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and prokaryotic (β) clamp proteins have unrelated sequences, yet they have strikingly similar structures and thus share a common ancestor (2,3). The clamps must be opened and closed around DNA, and this job is performed by a multiprotein clamp-loading ATPase [reviewed in (4)]. The eukaryotic replication factor C (RFC) and the prokaryotic (γ complex) clamp-loader subunits are arranged in a circle and are each members of the AAA+ protein family [briefly reviewed in (4)].
The replicases of all cells function within a greater context, involving many other proteins. For example, two basic activities at a replication fork include a helicase to separate the duplex DNA and a primase that produces short RNA primers, which are required to initiate DNA synthesis. This larger machinery, frequently termed the “replisome,” is fairly well defined in prokaryotes (1,5–8). InE. coli, and presumably other bacteria, the leading- and lagging-strand polymerases are connected to the clamp loader, which also binds a homohexameric helicase (DnaB inE. coli). The helicase acts on the lagging strand and activates the RNA primase (DnaG inE. coli). The replicase also makes a specific functional connection to single-stranded DNA-binding protein (SSB), which is present at the fork to protect single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) and melt hairpins.
The eukaryotic replisome, in contrast, involves many more proteins and is less defined at the current time [reviewed in (9–11)]. The eukaryotic helicase, primase, and SSB are all heterooligomers. The helicase is thought to be the heterohexameric MCM complex (12), and the primase is the four-subunit DNA polymerase α/primase that makes a hybrid RNA/DNA primer (13). The heterotrimeric replication protein A (RPA) functions as the SSB (14). Several additional eukaryotic proteins without prokaryotic counterparts are thought to act during replication initiation and fork progression as well (e.g., Cdc45, GINS complex, Dpb11, Sld2, and Sld3) (15–17). The functions of most of these components are presently unknown. In addition, the leading- and lagging-strand polymerases are thought to be different enzymes, Pol δ (3–4subunits) and Pol ε (4subunits). It is still unclear which strands these polymerases act upon. Finally, many of these proteins are regulated by posttranslational modification, including the PCNA clamp which is ubiquitinated and sumoylated (18–20).
The clamp and clamp loaders of cellular replicases, prokaryote and eukaryote alike, also function in several other processes besides replication. For example, PCNA and β bind DNA ligase as well as mismatch and excision repair proteins, although the exact role of these interactions is still not entirely clear (21–23). A weak consensus sequence for proteins that bind PCNA reveals a broad array of additional proteins that bind this clamp and are generally involved in repair, chromatin structure, or cell cycle control (21). The clamps also function with other DNA polymerases (23,24), probably helping to target them to sites where their action is required. Eukaryotes even utilize alternative RFC clamp loaders in which one subunit is replaced by a unique protein that presumably specializes the complex for the alternative function (25–27,234–243). These alternative clamp loaders load PCNA clamps at specific target sites or, in one case, load an alternate PCNA-like clamp.
Because of space limitations, this review focuses on prokaryotic and eukaryotic replicases and forgoes a description of archaebacterial, bacteriophage, and viral replicases. However, archaebacteria also utilize a similar clamp and clamp-loader strategy, as does the T4 bacteriophage (see the table inFigure 1) [reviewed in (7,28), respectively]. We regret that space limitations prevent discussion of the phage T4 replisome in a similar manner; it is an enormously valuable system from which many basic early concepts of replisome action emerged, and it continues to provide fresh insights. A recent review in this series (7) expertly distills the T4 contributions to date and how they relate to theE. colisystem. The replicative polymerases of most bacteriophage and viruses do not utilize a clamp and clamp loader, but these polymerases generally require one or two accessory factors that confer processivity [see T7 phage (7,29,30), vaccinia virus (31,32), herpes virus (33,34), and Pol γ (35)]. The authors have also refrained from discussing DNA replication initiation due to space limitation. Many useful reviews exist on this topic [see (1,28,36,37)].
THEE. coliREPLICASEThe first cellular replicase to be studied,E. coliDNA polymerase III holoenzyme, was isolated as an intact particle fromE. coliextracts in the early 1980s, and its structure and function serve as a suitable paradigm for its eukaryotic counterpart (1). We, therefore, begin this review with the prokaryotic replicase machinery.
Pol III CoreDNA polymerase III (Pol III) was originally identified in a mutant strain ofE. coli,polA-(38). This strain lacked the comparatively strong DNA polymerase I activity, unmasking the replicative polymerase. The identity of this activity was likely the core polymerase subcomplex. The specific activity of Pol III core is similar to Pol I, but as will be described below, Pol III core functions with accessory proteins that convert it to an exceedingly efficient enzyme having the highest specific activity of anyE. coliDNA polymerase (1).
Pol III core is a 1:1:1 heterotrimer of the α polymerase, ε 3′-5′ proofreading exonuclease, and θ subunits (39,40) (seeTable 1). The α subunit (encoded bydnaE) contains the DNA polymerase activity, incorporating 8 nucleotides/second (ntd/s), similar to Pol III core (20 ntd/s) (41). The ε (dnaQ) subunit is the proofreading 3′-5′ exonuclease. It is interesting to note that without ε the processivity of holoenzyme is markedly reduced from >50 kb to about 1.5 kb (42), thereby ensuring that the proofreading ε subunit is present during genome duplication. In contrast, the small θ subunit (holE) has no known function besides a slight stimulation of ε (43) and theholEgene can be deleted with little consequence (44).
Escherichia colireplisome components and associated functionsaLittle structural information is available for Pol III core. The α subunit is a member of the C family of DNA polymerases (45). Members of this family are present only in bacteria, and it remains the only major family for which no crystal structure has been solved. One may presume that it will contain the characteristic palm, thumb, and fingers domains and two-metal mechanism of catalysis present in all other polymerases (46). Deletion mutagenesis suggests that the active site is located in the N-terminal two thirds of α, whereas contacts to other holoenzyme components are made through the C-terminal region (47,48).
Atomic resolution structures of portions of ε and θ are available (49–51). The ε subunit is composed of two domains (52). The N-terminal domain (186residues out of243) contains the exonuclease active site and the θ binding site. The crystal structure of this active fragment has been solved (49), and it is structurally similar to other polymerase-associated exonucleases and the exonuclease domain of DNA polymerase I. The preferred DNA substrate for ε is a single-stranded 3′ terminus, and a fully base-paired recessed 3′ terminus is a poor substrate for ε alone (53,54). However, α tightly associates with the C terminus of ε and stimulates ε activity on a recessed 3′ terminus, probably by bringing ε to the primer site. ε preferentially degrades a primer/template with a mismatched recessed 3′ terminus. In addition, α polymerization is inhibited by a mismatch, which provides ε more time to complete the excision.
The structure of θ bears a resemblance to a DNA-interacting domain of eukaryotic DNA polymerase β (50,51). This structural similarity may underlie the slight stimulation of ε by θ and increased mutator phenotype of aholE-null mutant in an ε mutant background (44).
The β Sliding ClampPol III core by itself is slow, incorporating 20 ntd/s, and weakly processive, extending only 1–10 bases per binding event (41). In fact, no matter how much time or enzyme is available, the Pol III core cannot extend a unique primer full circle around an M13 ssDNA genome (55,56).
To become an efficient replicase, the core polymerase requires the β clamp. Coupled to β, core becomes exceedingly fast (∼750 ntd/s) and processive (>50 kb). Biochemical studies initially revealed that β binds DNA topologically (57), implying it has a ring shape and encircles the duplex, whereupon it freely slides along it. This hypothesis was quickly proven by structure analysis (3) (Figure 2). Core polymerase directly associates with β (57–59), initially occupying about 22 base pairs (bp) of primer (60,61). As core extends DNA, it pulls the β clamp along behind it.
The crystal structure of the β dimer (3) shows that the two crescent-shaped protomers form a ring with a large central channel of ∼35 Å in diameter that may easily accommodate double-stranded (ds) DNA modeled inside (Figure 2a,b). In fact, room exists for one or two layers of water between the DNA and β, suggesting β may “ice skate” along the duplex. The center of the β ring is lined with 12 α-helices, pairs of which are supported by an outer β-sheet. This helix pair and sheet motif forms one globular domain, which is repeated six times around the ring, creating a sixfold pseudosymmetry. Each β monomer consists of three domains and dimerizes head-to-tail with another to produce two structurally distinct “faces.” One face has several loops and protruding C termini. This is the face of the ring that interacts with other proteins as discussed below (62,63).
The β clamp is a tight dimer, and its half-life on DNA is over 1 h at 37°C (64,65). The δ subunit of γ complex can open β by itself, as determined by its ability to rapidly remove the β clamp from DNA (64,66). It appears that only one δ binds β2, and it does not dissociate the β dimer into monomers, even though it must destabilize one interface (62,65,66). This idea is consistent with the ability of γ complex to load β that is cross-linked across one dimer interface (66). A cocrystal structure of δ bound to a monomeric mutant of β has been solved (67). This structure shows two distinct points of contact between δ and β. The contact points are located on the opposite ends of the same α-helix, which is located in the N-terminal domain of δ. One end of the helix binds a hydrophobic pocket between domains II and III of β. The other end appears to push on a loop at the dimer interface, leading to a distorted interface that can no longer close. It is proposed that δ gets a grip on β via the hydrophobic pocket and pushes on the loop to crack the interface or to hold the interface open. Mutational analysis of these contact points has confirmed their roles in clamp-loader interaction and clamp opening (68).
The δ-β structure explains how the interface is cracked but not how the ring opens to accommodate DNA in the central channel. Comparison of the β dimer and β monomer (from the δ-β structure) shows significant rigid body motions between the domains, leading to a shallower crescent shape in the monomer (67) (seeFigure 2c). This implies that the β ring is under spring tension in the closed state until δ disrupts one interface, allowing tension between the domains to relax and producing a gap for DNA-strand passage (seeFigure 2d). The strong interactions at the dimer interfaces likely maintain this tension.
The γ Complex Clamp LoaderTheE. coliclamp loader is a complex composed of five different subunits in a defined stoichiometry: γ3δ1δ′1χ1ψ1(69,70). The γ complex harnesses the energy of ATP binding and hydrolysis to topologically link β to a primed DNA, then it ejects from DNA, leaving the closed clamp behind (57,66,71). It is convenient to dissect the clamp loader by the primary function of each subunit (4). The three γ subunits are the only subunits that bind ATP (72,73) and have thus been termed the “motor” of the complex. The δ subunit is called the “wrench” because it is the main β clamp-interacting subunit, and it can open the dimer interface by itself. The δ′ subunit modulates δ-β contact (66). δ′ appears to be a rigid protein (74). Unlike γ and δ, the domains of δ′ have more intramolecular interactions and assume the same orientation in the δ′ structure and δ′ within γ3δδ′. This feature has earned δ′ the term “stator,” the stationary part of a machine upon which other parts move. In contrast, the three domains of γ assume different orientations in the γ trimer. The domains of δ also assume different orientations in δ-β compared to γ3δδ′. The γ3δ1δ′1complex is termed the “minimal” clamp loader, as it is sufficient to place β on a DNA template (75). The χ and ψ subunits are not essential for the clamp-loading mechanism (76), but χ links the clamp loader to SSB and primase (77,78), which will be discussed below. ψ serves as a connector to χ (76) and also strengthens the γ3δδ′ complex (79).
A broad outline of the clamp-loading mechanism has been determined from biochemical studies (4,66). The nucleotide-free clamp loader has a low affinity for the clamp (62). The δ subunit, which binds tightly to β, is likely sequestered by the other subunits without ATP present. Upon ATP binding, the γ complex undergoes a conformational change (62,71) that allows tight binding to the clamp, whereupon δ opens one dimer interface of the clamp (65). The clamp-clamp loader complex has a strong affinity for DNA, particularly a primed template (71,80). The DNA, presumably threaded through the clamp, stimulates ATPase activity in γ complex, and this allows the ring to close around DNA and the clamp loader to eject, thereby recycling it for repeated rounds of clamp loading (66,81). Hydrolysis of ATP leaves the clamp loader in a low-affinity DNA-binding state, presumably until ADP dissociates and the γ complex can be recharged with triphosphate nucleotides (80,82–84).
The crystal structure of the γ3δδ′ complex provided deeper insight into clamp-loader action (70). This accomplishment was followed two years later by the crystal structure of the eukaryotic clamp loader bound to its clamp (85), which has filled in many details that will be discussed later. The five subunits ofE. coliγ3δδ′ are arranged in a circular fashion (70) (Figure 3b). The three γ subunits are adjacent to one another, flanked on one side by δ and the other by δ′, which in turn interact with each other to complete the ring. Each subunit consists of three domains, and oligomerization is mediated mainly by the C-terminal domain III (Figure 3a,b). The N-terminal domains I and II of all five subunits adopt the chain fold of the AAA+ (ATPasesassociated with a variety of cellularactivities) family (Figure 3a) [reviewed in (86,87)]. Although only γ binds ATP (72), δ′ has conserved elements of the AAA+ family (88). In contrast, the δ sequence has diverged, making the discovery of its AAA+ fold surprising.
The ATP sites of γ complex are located at subunit interfaces and are supplemented with residues from the adjacent subunit (seeFigure 3c). The interfacial location of ATP sites is typical of AAA+ oligomers and is presumed to promote communication among the subunits. δ′ contributes a key arginine to ATP Site 1 of the γ complex, as seen in the left panel ofFigure 3c(red residue) with an ATP molecule modeled along the phosphate-binding loop (blue). This arginine is located in a conserved serine-arginine-cysteine (SRC) motif that is present in all known clamp loaders. Mutation of the δ′ Arg, and the homologous residue in γ, causes a severe defect in clamp-loading and ATPase activity and also disrupts interaction with DNA (γ mutants) or β (δ′ mutants) (89,90). Mutation of the P-loop of γ has more severe consequences that result in complete loss of activity (73). These observations highlight the coordination of the ATP cycle with the clamp-loading mechanism, suggesting regulation of substrate binding by conformational changes in distinct ATP sites during nucleotide binding and hydrolysis.
The C termini (domains III) of the five subunits of the minimal γ complex form a tight ring, or collar (91), but the N-terminal AAA+ domains (I and II) are more loosely associated, with a total lack of contact between δ and δ′ in these domains, creating a gap in the N-terminal portion of the ring (70) (Figure 3b). This gap may function to allow DNA to pass into β positioned under the clamp-loader complex, as discussed in the RFC section of this review. Both ATP- and β-clamp binding occur in these N-terminal domains (67,92). The loose connections of these domains has led to the suggestion that some conformational freedom of the N termini is essential for function (93). The structure of γ3δδ′ lacks ATP and thus is in the inactive state. Consistent with this, a β dimer cannot be docked onto the γ complex (replacing δ with δ-β) without significant clashes, even with the substantial gap between δ and δ′ (70). Biophysical experiments in solution indicate that the distance between δ and δ′ does not change dramatically during clamp association (93). Hence, some other conformational change may occur that does not necessitate increasing the gap between δ and δ′. For example, δ may be pushed downward relative to δ′, thus exposing the β-binding element of δ without changing the distance between δ and δ′. In addition, the γ subunit also binds β (94). Taken together, these observations imply that an extensive surface of interaction is formed between the clamp and clamp loader. How the clamp loader binds the clamp and DNA is illuminated by the RFC-PCNA structure discussed later in this review.
The Holoenzyme ParticleOn the basis of intracellular Pol III subunit concentrations, a portion of clamp loader is associated with the Pol III holoenzyme, but a majority of the clamp loader is free in solution (64,95). The clamp loader associated with the holoenzyme contains a different form of thednaXgene. The γ subunit is produced through a ribosomal frameshift in thednaXgene, which causes almost immediate termination of translation to produce a 47.5-kDa protein (96,97). The full-length product ofdnaXis the τ subunit (71.1 kDa), which contains the γ sequence plus a unique 23.6 kDa C-terminal region (τc) (Figure 4a). The 23.6 kDa τcis comprised of two domains, IV and V, that bind DnaB and Pol III core (through α), respectively (98,99). The τcregion is not required for clamp loading but is essential for cell viability (100), probably owing to its ability to organize the replisome as discussed below.
The DnaX protein is present in three copies in the clamp-loader complex, and thus various species may assemble in stoichiometries of γ3, γ2τ1, γ1τ2, and τ3(69). Each τ C terminus will recruit one polymerase, and therefore the more τ present in the clamp loader, the more core polymerase molecules it may bind. At least two polymerases are required for concurrent synthesis of leading and lagging strands (Figure 4b). Because of this requirement, it is thought that theE. colireplicase contains two Pol III cores attached to a τ2γ1δδ′ χψ clamp loader and that a specific order of assembly leads to this particle (69,101,102), which is termed Pol III* (or Pol III star). The β clamp associates with Pol III* in an ATP-dependent manner to form the Pol III holoenzyme. The single-copy subunits of the clamp loader define an inherent asymmetry, and thus by definition, the two cores attached to the two τ subunits are in somewhat different environments (8). The consequence of this asymmetric structure might be minimal because a proline-rich segment of τ separates the clamp-loader and polymerase-interacting domains, suggesting a flexible connection. However, DnaB or other holoenzyme subunits may hold the cores in defined asymmetric positions (103). It has been proposed that the asymmetric structure imposes distinct properties onto the two polymerases, modeling their behavior to fit the different needs of replicating the leading and lagging strands (8,102,104–109).
Replisome DynamicsThe τ subunits of Pol III holoenzyme not only connect two core polymerases to the central clamp loader, but also connect the replicase to the DnaB helicase (seeFigure 4b). The homohexameric DnaB encircles the lagging strand, and when coupled to DNA synthesis through τ, its unwinding rate increases from ∼35 bp/s to near holoenzyme speed (98,99,103,110–112).
As the replisome advances, the polymerase on the leading strand simply extends DNA in a continuous fashion. Presumed impediments to leading strand extension include sites of DNA damage and the consequent collapse of the fork. Repair and restart of synthesis is an elaborate process detailed in recent reviews (113,114). Pol III holoenzyme has been implicated in mediating the restart of DNA replication after fork stalling (115).
Lagging-strand replication is a discontinuous process of fits and starts that repeats in a cycle time of 1–3 s. An overview of the lagging-strand cycle is illustrated inFigure 4b. Each Okazaki fragment is initiated by primase, which synthesizes an RNA primer of about 10–12 nucleotides (116,117). Primase action requires interaction with DnaB, which involves a C-terminal region of primase (118,119). Primase extends the RNA in the opposite direction of helicase unwinding and is presumed to separate from DnaB, which may account for its observed distributive action (120). Primase remains attached to the RNA primed site through its interaction with SSB (121–123). Although primase eventually dissociates, release of primase is accelerated by the χ subunit of the clamp loader, which binds SSB in a competitive fashion, recruiting the clamp loader to the DNA template to compete with primase (124). The clamp loader then places β onto the primer for the lagging-strand polymerase.
As the lagging polymerase extends a fragment, a loop is generated because it is connected to the leading polymerase (via the clamp loader), yet extends DNA in the opposite direction (see top left diagram), as originally proposed (125) and recently confirmed (126) in the T4 system. The 1–3 kb Okazaki fragment will be completed within a few seconds (Figure 4b, top right diagram), and at this point, the core must rapidly release from DNA to start the next fragment (bottom right diagram). The highly processive Pol III requires a specific mechanism for this release step, which disengages core from β, leaving the β clamp behind on the finished fragment. The release step occurs only at a nick, thus ensuring completion of the fragment, and requires the τ subunit (127–130). The lagging-strand core is now free to bind a new β clamp placed on the next RNA primer by the clamp loader (bottom left diagram).
Replication fork progression has been studied inE. coli, using rolling-circle DNA templates (103,107,116,120,131–133). That β clamps accumulate on the lagging strand and that the single clamp loader can rapidly load clamps on DNA repeatedly during fork progression have been demonstrated using this system (103). The accumulated β clamps can be recycled by the unloading action of γ complex and also by the fivefold excess of free δ subunit in theE. colicell (64).
Protein Trafficking on DNA Sliding ClampsMany different proteins function with sliding clamps. An understanding of the way proteins coordinate their traffic flow on clamps is now emerging. To illustrate how proteins may switch positions to utilize the clamp, we briefly describe three important switches on β that occur during the progression of theE. colireplication fork.
The γ/τ clamp loader and Pol III core are known to bind the same face of β in essentially the same spot, and therefore these two factors compete for the clamp (63,134). Yet both the core and γ/τ complex must function with β at the start of each DNA chain. This protein trafficking event is facilitated by the fact that ATP hydrolysis ejects the clamp loader from β (Figure 5a) (71). In addition, the clamp loader remains in a reduced activity state for a short interval, presumably owing to slow ADP release (80,83). The core polymerase is then free to bind the abandoned β clamp and, in fact, binds tighter on DNA than off (63).
Switching on β is also thought to occur when the leading polymerase stalls. In this case it is thought that a bypass polymerase, either Pol IV or Pol V, takes possession of the clamp to extend DNA through the stall site. Recent structural analysis suggests that Pol IV can associate in two ways with β (135,136). Pol IV binds the edge of the β ring and one hydrophobic pocket, but Pol IV is angled off the DNA (135). It is possible that in this binding mode Pol IV may bind to β simultaneously with Pol III (seeFigure 5b). Upon stalling of Pol III, Pol IV must break its interaction with the side of the β ring and swing down to the DNA, presumably maintaining its hold on the hydrophobic pocket of β. This action would displace Pol III from DNA and perhaps disrupts the Pol III-β contact as well. Pol IV is distributive, even with β, allowing Pol III to regain the clamp after the lesion is bypassed. Recent evidence with Pol III, Pol V, and β suggests that a similar trade-off may occur (137). At the end of an Okazaki fragment, the normally highly processive Pol III rapidly dissociates from β (127–130), freeing the polymerase to extend the next Okazaki fragment. This β trafficking event is mediated by the τcportion of τ. The α subunit binds β via the extreme α C-terminal residues (134). τcalso binds the α C terminus and disrupts core-β interaction. However, τcbinds ssDNA, and this prevents τ from binding the C-terminal residues of α. Hence, so long as there is ssDNA template, τcis turned “off,” and core functions with β. But when all available ssDNA is converted to duplex, τcturns “on” and separates core from β (seeFigure 5c).These switch processes explain how interactions with the clamp are modulated by ATP or DNA structure to promote the trafficking of different proteins on sliding clamps to ensure progression of replication.
THE EUKARYOTIC REPLICASEAlthough the complexity of architecture, interaction, and regulation of DNA replication is far greater in eukaryotes than in bacteria, the core replicase components are structurally and functionally more similar than different. However, beyond this basic machinery lies a much larger network of proteins required for propagation of the replication fork and regulation of its advance as well as coordinating its activity with other DNA metabolic machineries. Many of these details are only now coming into focus.
Proliferating Cell Nuclear AntigenPCNA derives its name from the early finding that the protein is abundant in proliferating cells (138). PCNA was shown to be directly involved in DNA replication through its ability to stimulate DNA polymerase δ in replicating long stretches of primed DNA (139–141). This characteristic suggested it may be analogous to theE. coliβ subunit, although neither were known to be sliding clamps at the time. Subsequent work showed the importance of PCNA for simian virus 40 (SV40) DNA replication and its enhanced activity in the presence of RFC and ATP (142).
As a monomeric unit, PCNA is about two-thirds the size of β, and accordingly, each protomer contains two structurally similar domains instead of the three domains found in β (2). The chain folds of the two PCNA domains are the same as those found in the domains of β. PCNA and β form very similar ring-shaped structures, except PCNA must trimerize to form a six-domain ring (Figure 6a). Like β, the PCNA ring is quite stably attached to DNA (t1/2= 24 min) (143). The PCNA protomers are also arranged head-to-tail to create two distinct “faces” of the ring, mirroring β. As in theE. colisystem, the eukaryotic clamp loader and polymerase compete for binding the same face of the PCNA ring, the face from which the C termini project (144,145).
A variety of proteins involved in DNA repair and cell cycle control interact with PCNA, but this topic is covered elsewhere [reviewed in (21,23)]. Relevant to the current review, a weak PCNA-binding consensus sequence has emerged: Q-x-x-h-X-X-a-a, where x = any residue; h = L,I,M; and a = F,Y (21,23). The crystal structure of human PCNA in complex with a peptide derived from the cell cycle regulator p21WAF1/Cip1was the first to demonstrate that these clamp-binding proteins interact with PCNA at a hydrophobic pocket located between the two domains of a protomer (146). The finding generalizes to the position at which DNA polymerase binds the T4 gp45 clamp (147–149). Also, the α subunit of Pol III core and δ subunit of γ complex bindE. coliβ at a spot between domains II and III (24,67,150).
The RFC Clamp LoaderThe eukaryotic clamp loader was first isolated as a required component of the in vitro SV40 genome replication system (151) [reviewed in (152)]. The activity was originally named replication factor C (RFC) (51) or activator-1 (153). RFC is a DNA-dependent ATPase that functions with PCNA to confer processivity on DNA polymerase δ (142) [reviewed in (154,155)]. The similarity between RFC andE. coliγ complex was apparent early on. RFC consists of five different proteins that are homologous to each other and to γ and δ′ ofE. coliγ complex (156,157). Common sequence motifs among these clamp-loader AAA+ proteins have been termed RFC boxes.
In overview, RFC acts similarly to γ complex. In an ATP-dependent reaction, RFC loads PCNA onto a recessed 3′ primer/template junction and then dissociates, allowing PCNA to function with Pol δ (158,159). The RFC subunits inS. cerevisiaeare referred to as RFC1–5 (157) (seeTable 2for human RFC nomenclature). RFC2–5 share a similar molecular weight and three-domain architecture characteristic of theE. coliγ subunit (85,160). RFC1 also contains these three domains, along with sizable N- and C-terminal extensions (161). The N-terminal region (residues 1–275 inS. cerevisiae) has clear homology to DNA ligases, although there is no evidence of ligase activity. The removal of the RFC1 N terminus results in sensitivity to DNA-damaging agents (162), but this region is not necessary for in vitro clamp loading (163) or cell viability (162). The C-terminal domain (residues 660–861 inS. cerevisiae) has not yet been characterized genetically or biochemically.
Eukaryotic replisome componentsThe five-subunit composition of RFC bears a close similarity to the minimalE. coliγ3δδ′ complex (85). On the basis of subunit interactions and sequence similarity to γ complex subunits, the subunit arrangement of the RFC pentamer was proposed (4,164) and has since been proven by structure analysis (85). RFC1 shares characteristics of the δ subunit in its conserved clamp-interacting residues and position in the pentamer (163,165). RFC2–4 are considered γ-like in their ability to form a trimeric ATPase subassembly (166). RFC5 is in the position of δ′, and like δ′ it contains an SRC motif but lacks a consensus phosphate-binding loop (P-loop). Like the γ3δδ′ complex, the ATP sites of RFC are located at subunit interfaces. However, unlike γ3δδ′, RFC contains four competent ATPase sites because RFC1 also binds ATP where δ does not. In fact, RFC5 also binds a nucleotide in the crystal structure.
During the RFC ATPase cycle inS. cerevisiae, the complex initially binds two ATP, then a third upon PCNA binding, and a fourth when it locates the primer/template DNA, which triggers ATP hydrolysis, causing RFC to eject and leave the closed PCNA ring on DNA (167). This mechanism excludes the route of RFC first encountering DNA and subsequently recruiting PCNA. ATP site mutational studies have demonstrated that, in general, disrupting any one of the four consensus ATP sites has a significant effect on the activity of RFC (168–170), although ATP binding may suffice to rescue this defect in at least one ATP site (in RFC4 forS. cerevisiae). These single P-loop mutants still bind PCNA readily but are deficient in DNA binding (170).
A crystal structure of an RFC-PCNA complex has been solved (85). To promote stability of this nucleotide-dependent interaction by preventing hydrolysis, ATPγS was used, and RFC was produced with R to Q mutations in the SRC motifs. The RFC-ATPγS-PCNA crystal structure has provided a detailed view of how a clamp loader interacts with its cognate clamp (seeFigure 6b). In addition, the structure has revealed how DNA binds to a clamp loader. The main PCNA contacts occur through RFC1 and RFC3, which bind to the hydrophobic pocket between the domains of two different PCNA protomers. RFC1 interacts extensively with PCNA, whereas RFC3 seems to be only “partially engaged” with PCNA and the ring is closed. In the RFC-ATPγS-PCNA structure, RFC2 and RFC5 do not bind PCNA at all. This suboptimal interaction of RFC with PCNA may explain why the clamp remains closed and only slightly perturbed from its unbound structure. Alternatively, the closed PCNA may be due to crystal packing forces, instability of an open-ring complex, or the arginine to glutamine mutation in the four SRC motifs. Although this mutation should ensure that no ATPγS becomes hydrolyzed, it may have prevented or perturbed some necessary RFC subunit-PCNA interaction needed for clamp opening.
The way RFC binds DNA is suggested by the helical arrangement of RFC subunits in the structure, with the helical axis passing through the central channel of the closed PCNA (seeFigure 6c,e). The helix begins at RFC1, the subunit that is fully engaged with the hydrophobic pocket on one PCNA protomer. Adjacent to RFC1 is RFC4, displaced by the helical operator of 61° rotation and 5.5 Å translation. Overall, the helical operations that relate all five subunits have a pitch of ∼5.6 Å per 60° rotation, ending with RFC5, which lies ∼25 Å above PCNA and is significantly separated from the ATPase domain of RFC1. This right-handed helix and pitch mimics that of duplex B-form DNA. Furthermore, there is sufficient space in the center of RFC to model a DNA duplex, which passes right through the center of PCNA. Each RFC subunit has two α-helices that are oriented so their positive dipole tracks the minor groove phosphate backbone of DNA modeled into the structure (Figure 6e). Several basic residues on these helices are conserved inE. coliand eukaryotic clamp loaders, consistent with the idea that DNA binds within this central area of RFC. Modeling a 3′-recessed, primed template from another crystal structure into the center of the ring shows that the specific recognition of a primer/template by RFC might occur by a simple clash of the primed-template junction with the domain III cap of the RFC subunits. A stiff duplex DNA could not proceed through the RFC structure because it would hit the cap and could not bend to exit out the side of RFC. The flexible ssDNA of a primed junction may bend to exit through the gap between RFC1 and 5, perhaps assisted by a positive patch on the RFC1 surface (seeFigure 6e). This hypothesis of specific primer/template recognition is in agreement with recent biophysical evidence of RFC/DNA association (171,172).
Eukaryotic DNA PolymerasesMany DNA polymerases are now known to function in the eukaryotic cell. These polymerases all share a common catalytic mechanism [reviewed in (11)], but most serve a specific function outside of basic genome duplication. DNA polymerases α, δ, and ε are the established replicative polymerases and are thought to function together at the replication fork to copy genomic DNA in a semi-discontinuous manner. Pol α, δ, and ε are all members of the B-family of DNA polymerases (45).
Pol α consists of four subunits (13). The DNA polymerase activity is found in the largest subunit (p180), and primase activity is located in the smallest subunit (p48). The exact functions of the middle two subunits are not clear, but all four subunits are present in Pol α isolated from yeast, human,Xenopus, andDrosophila.
A unified subunit nomenclature for Pol δ has recently been proposed (182). On the basis ofSchizosaccharomyces pombePol δ subunits and their homologues in other eukaryotes, the subunits have been renamed A–D for the Pol3(A), Cdc1(B), Cdc27(C), and Cdm1(D) polypeptides. Much debate has centered on the possibility of the Pol δ complex self-associating into a dimer. The most recent evidence in multiple systems indicates that Pol δ complex contains only one copy of each subunit across a wide range of concentrations and has an elongated shape that resulted in the earlier confusion over whether it was a dimeric polymerase particle (183,184). Pol δ subcomplexes can also be isolated as a core A/B dimer (180,185). A zinc-finger module in subunit A interacts with subunit B, which acts as a bridge to subunits C and D (when present) (183,186,187). The polymerase and 3′-5′ exonuclease activities of Pol δ are present in the large A subunit. The Pol δ polymerase extends DNA with high fidelity, but the exonuclease seems surprisingly ineffective in vitro inS. pombe(188) and may be most important when Pol δ is clamped onto DNA by PCNA (189,190).
Pol δ associates with PCNA via interactions with at least two of its subunits. The clamp is positioned behind the polymerase (191), preventing polymerase dissociation as it extends a primer (192). The strongest interaction is between PCNA and subunit C (193). Subunit C contains the consensus PCNA interaction motif, and studies in yeast show that this PCNA-interacting subunit stimulates Pol δ (183,194). Surprisingly, stimulation is not dependent upon the PCNA-interacting motif but mainly on the domain involved in connection to the A/B complex. The A/B heterodimer alone can also associate with PCNA, presumably through subunit A (180). The stimulation of subunit C on Pol δ activity might be due to protein complex stabilization rather than catalytic enhancement. Even the smallDsubunit from the human four-subunit Pol δ complex significantly stimulated the A/B/C subcomplex in assays with RFC and PCNA (179).
A recent report on Pol ε concludes that it is a heterotetramer with a stoichiometry of 1:1:1:1, presumably in all eukaryotes (202). The DNA polymerase and 3′-5′ exonuclease of Pol ε reside in the largest subunit and appear to have a higher fidelity than Pol δ/PCNA (203). The third-largest subunit, Dpb4, is also a member of a complex that appears to be involved in chromatin remodeling (204) (A. Tackett and B. Chait, personal communication). Pol ε activity does not absolutely require PCNA, but PCNA stimulation increases as the ionic strength is raised (205–207). The PCNA interaction motif on the large subunit of Pol ε is not essential for cell viability, but mutational analysis of this sequence suggests a role in DNA repair (208).
The Eukaryotic ReplisomeThe essential nature of both Pol δ and Pol ε and the fact that they both function with PCNA as monomeric polymerase particles have led to renewed proposals that they function together to replicate the leading and lagging strands.
Xenopusextracts have shown that depletion of either polymerase results in a dramatic drop in replication (209,210). Depletion of Pol δ gave rise to many short nascent strands that may have been improperly elongated Okazaki fragments, whereas Pol ε depletion merely slowed down the replication machinery. Viability of Pol ε-deleted strains of yeast suggests that Pol ε is not essential for cell viability (198,201,211). However, an inactive point mutant of Pol ε resulted in cell death (212). One possible explanation for this apparent contradiction is that another polymerase, presumably Pol δ, can carry out DNA replication in the complete absence of Pol ε but that the Pol ε point mutant acted as a dominant negative to stop the fork.
Intensive studies of in vitro replication from the SV40 origin have provided great insight into eukaryotic fork function, but the SV40 T antigen fills many roles ordinarily performed by host proteins, including helicase function (213). Study of polymerases in this system show that Pol δ and Pol α, and even Pol α alone under some conditions, are sufficient for replication. However, the small size of the genome and use of T antigen may minimize the requirements for replication [reviewed in (152)]. Reconstitution of a eukaryotic replisome on a rolling-circle template may greatly facilitate our understanding of the roles of Pol ε and Pol δ and which strand(s) they operate on.
The 10-fold-smaller size of eukaryotic lagging-strand fragments (∼200 bp) compared toE. coliis counterbalanced by the 10-fold-slower rate of fork movement. Stoichiometric use of PCNA clamps during lagging-strand replication has not been demonstrated but is presumed to occur as it does with theE. coliβ clamp. That PCNA clamps are left behind on lagging-strand fragments is implied by the fact that PCNA interacts with and, in some cases, stimulates the factors necessary for Okazaki fragment maturation (214–216). There is also an interesting observation that PCNA-DNA complexes may persist through mitosis, marking chromosomes for epigenetic inheritance (217,218).
The eukaryotic replisome factors that contain helicase, primase, and SSB are each composed of multi-protein assemblies in eukaryotes [reviewed in (9)]. This complexity is in contrast to the single-subunit factors inE. coli. For example, even the SSB in eukaryotes, termed RPA, is composed of three subunits in a 1:1:1 heterotrimer [reviewed in (14)]. It is widely believed that the eukaryotic helicase is the heterohexameric MCM2-7 complex [reviewed in (12)], although this conclusion is not yet firm. LikeE. coliDnaB, the hexameric MCM complex is ring shaped, but each MCM subunit is a different polypeptide. Subunit arrangements for the MCM2-7 complex have been proposed (219,220). Helicase activity has been observed only for the MCM4/6/7 subcomplex (221–223), yet all six MCM genes are essential in a variety of systems (224) [also, see references within (12)]. These findings have led to the suggestion that one or more of the MCM2,3,5 subunits act as regulators (219,222,225). Consistent with this view, MCM2 inhibits the MCM4/6/7 helicase. The MCM complex is also a target of phosphorylation and ubiquitination and is thought to require activation for helicase action after assembly on DNA. MCM subunits are AAA+ proteins and thus are thought to have an evolutionary origin distinct from DnaB, which is constructed from the RecA module. Furthermore, these helicases translocate on DNA with opposite polarities (221–223), thereby placing the MCMs on the leading strand (seeFigure 7). However, like DnaB, the MCMs have been shown to be capable of encircling two DNA strands (223,226), and evidence that they may form a double hexamer exists in both Archaea (227,228) andS. pombe(229) systems. One line of evidence for this comes from an archaeal single-gene MCM that produces a circular double hexamer with helicase activity (227).
MCM helicase activity is rather weak, somewhat reminiscent of the relatively weak helicase activity ofE. coliDnaB. As described earlier, DnaB becomes highly active when coupled to Pol III holoenzyme, and this coupling occurs through the τ subunit of the clamp loader (111). It seems likely that a similar arrangement may exist in eukaryotes. In the scheme ofFigure 7, RFC is proposed to act as a scaffold similar to the γ/τ complex inE. coli, bridging the two polymerases and coupling them to the helicase. The proposed connections are simply inferred because only scant evidence exists for an RFC-Pol δ interaction (176,177), and none as yet exists for RFC binding either Pol ε or the MCM complex. However, evidence exists for the presence of many other protein actors required for DNA synthesis and presumed to act at the eukaryotic replication fork. Although the individual functions of these factors are largely unknown, protein interaction studies indicate a network as illustrated schematically inFigure 7. Cdc45 has been known for some time to be required for replication, and interaction between Cdc45 and MCMs has been documented (230,231). Newer actors include Sld3, which binds Cdc45 (17), and the heterotetramer GINS complex, which appears to have a ring shape (15,232). The GINS complex also appears to bind Pol ε, and similar to Sld3, assembles at origins just prior to DNA synthesis (15). Dpb11 is thought to bind both Pol α and Pol ε (233), and it also forms a complex with Sld2 (16). Biochemical study of these various factors, alone and in combinations, will be required to understand their individual roles in chromosome replication and to determine whether they all function together at each replication fork.
Alternate RFC Complexes and Other Roles for Clamp LoadersSliding clamps are used in a variety of DNA metabolic processes (21,23), and one may presume that their respective clamp loader is also involved in most of these processes. In addition, the subunit composition of the eukaryotic clamp loader is altered to perform novel functions in DNA metabolism. This alteration involves the use of an alternate clamp-loader subunit, in place of RFC1. In fission yeast and human, the Rad17 subunit (Rad24 inS. cerevisiae) replaces p140 (RFC1) in complex with RFC2–5 (25,234). The Rad17-RFC complex is involved in the DNA damage checkpoint response, along with a novel PCNA-like sliding clamp formed from the trimer Rad9/Rad1/Hus1 (Ddc1/Rad17/Mec3 inS. cerevisiae) [reviewed in (235)]. This clamp loader loads the “911” clamp onto primed DNA in an RPA-stimulated reaction (236–239) and does so with opposite polarity to RFC (238). The function of the 911 clamp is not clear, but it presumably recruits other factors when loaded on DNA. There may be a 3′-5′ exonuclease activity in Rad9 or Hus1, thus providing a biochemical activity for the ring itself (240). RFC1 can also be replaced by Ctf18/Chl12 (26,241) or Elg1 (27,242,243), which are involved in cohesion and genome stability, respectively, although the specific roles of these complexes are not understood.
CONCLUDING REMARKSEach passing year brings significant advances in our understanding of replication fork mechanisms. However, for each question answered, 10 more crop up. Even in the relatively well-defined and intensively studied prokaryotic system there remain numerous questions. We still do not know how the proteins are truly arranged at the replication fork. How are the two polymerases oriented, do they face the same direction? Does the helicase encircle one or more strands? Does it act as a double hexamer? How is the helicase positioned on the replicase? How is the length of Okazaki fragments measured and regulated? What happens when the replisome encounters a lesion on the leading or lagging strand? Does the helicase continue to unwind DNA, and if so, how far does it go before it stops? To advance past a lesion,E. colimounts the SOS response and gets past the lesion by recombinative repair processes, collectively termed “replication restart” [reviewed in (113,114)]. How does the replication machinery coordinate its action with those of repair and recombination? How does the replisome deal with transcribing RNA polymerase and other proteins tightly bound to DNA?The sliding clamps in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes interact with many different DNA polymerases and repair proteins. For example, β and PCNA both interact with mismatch repair and excision repair proteins. What is the role of the clamps in these processes? The clamps also bind a variety of specialized DNA polymerases such as those of the Y-family, which have low fidelity but can bypass certain lesions. How do these polymerases trade places with the replicase at the right time and place to bypass lesions? How is the use of the clamp by these low-fidelity enzymes restricted and handed back to the high-fidelity replicase after a lesion is bypassed? PCNA appears to be modified by ubiquitination and/or sumoylation to assist this process. How do these modifications control the trafficking of different polymerases on PCNA? Eukaryotes use a variety of alternate clamp loaders in which RFC1 is replaced by another protein. These RFC1 substitutes appear to be involved in the DNA damage response, chromatin cohesion, and genome stability. How do these alternate clamp loaders function and do they interface with the normal replication machinery? Clearly much work remains to be done to address these important issues.
Knowledge of the eukaryotic replisome composition is rapidly becoming a complex challenge. How many more factors are there? How do they connect and what are their individual functions? Do all these proteins function within the same replisome or are there various types of eukaryotic replisomes, specialized for different regions of the chromosome or for different times in S phase? How is replisome assembly and function regulated at the start of S phase? How does this tie in with growth factors that work at the cell surface, and the complex kinase and cell cycle control networks that reach to the nucleus? How do DNA damage checkpoint and other checkpoint mechanisms exert their influence during ongoing S-phase events?The authors hope this review highlighted several important advances in our knowledge of replicase structure and function. However, these concluding remarks underscore how much is yet to be learned and perhaps provide some sense of how far we have yet to go.
acknowledgmentsThe authors are grateful to the following individuals for helpful comments and discussions: Greg Bowman, Brian Chait, Megan Davey, David Jeruzalmi, John Kuriyan, and Alan Tackett. We are also grateful to Nina Yao for providing help with artwork. This work was supported by a grant from the National Institutes of Health (GM38839) and by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.
TheAnnual Review of Biochemistryis online athttp://biochem.annualreviews.orgliterature citedStructural Mechanisms for Replicating DNA in EukaryotesEukaryotic DNA PolymerasesReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationStructural Symmetry and Protein FunctionGiant Viruses Infecting AlgaeTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveDnaA: Controlling the Initiation of Bacterial DNA Replication and MoreEukaryotic DNA PolymerasesReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationStructural Symmetry and Protein FunctionTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSHERPES SIMPLEX VIRUS DNA REPLICATIONMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeError-Prone DNA Polymerases: When Making a Mistake is the Only Way to Get AheadArchaeal DNA Replication: Eukaryal Proteins in a Bacterial ContextDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeCell Cycle Regulation of DNA ReplicationEukaryotic DNA Replication ForkEukaryotic Chromosome DNA Replication: Where, When, and How?Cell Cycle Regulation of DNA ReplicationEukaryotic Chromosome DNA Replication: Where, When, and How?DNA Replication in Eukaryotic CellsEukaryotic Chromosome DNA Replication: Where, When, and How?Cell Cycle Regulation of DNA ReplicationDNA Replication in Eukaryotic CellsLesion Bypass and the Reactivation of Stalled Replication ForksRegulation of Rad6/Rad18 Activity During DNA Damage ToleranceThe Fanconi Anemia DNA Repair Pathway: Structural and Functional Insights into a Complex DisorderControl of Nuclear Activities by Substrate-Selective and Protein-Group SUMOylationSumoylation: A Regulatory Protein Modification in Health and DiseaseThe Ubiquitin CodeHow the Fanconi Anemia Pathway Guards the GenomeRecognition and Processing of Ubiquitin-Protein Conjugates by the ProteasomeCell Cycle Regulation of DNA ReplicationStructural Mechanisms Underlying Posttranslational Modification by Ubiquitin-Like ProteinsEUKARYOTIC TRANSLESION SYNTHESIS DNA POLYMERASES: Specificity of Structure and FunctionUBIQUITIN-DEPENDENT REGULATION OF THE SYNAPSEProtein Modification by SUMOMolecular Mechanisms of Mammalian DNA Repair and the DNA Damage CheckpointsError-Prone DNA Polymerases: When Making a Mistake is the Only Way to Get AheadRegulation of Membrane Protein Transport by Ubiquitin and Ubiquitin-Binding ProteinsRegulation of Rad6/Rad18 Activity During DNA Damage ToleranceEUKARYOTIC TRANSLESION SYNTHESIS DNA POLYMERASES: Specificity of Structure and FunctionRegulation of Rad6/Rad18 Activity During DNA Damage ToleranceThe Fanconi Anemia DNA Repair Pathway: Structural and Functional Insights into a Complex DisorderCell Cycle Regulation of DNA ReplicationEUKARYOTIC TRANSLESION SYNTHESIS DNA POLYMERASES: Specificity of Structure and FunctionUnusual Life Style of Giant Chlorella VirusesVulnerabilities on the Lagging-Strand Template: Opportunities for Mobile ElementsDnaA: Controlling the Initiation of Bacterial DNA Replication and MoreDNA MISMATCH REPAIRDNA Mismatch Repair: Molecular Mechanisms and Biological FunctionError-Prone Repair DNA Polymerases in Prokaryotes and EukaryotesDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveEnvironmental Stress and Lesion-Bypass DNA PolymerasesDnaA: Controlling the Initiation of Bacterial DNA Replication and MoreMolecular Mechanisms of Mammalian DNA Repair and the DNA Damage CheckpointsArchaeal DNA Replication: Eukaryal Proteins in a Bacterial ContextToward Maintaining the Genome: DNA Damage and Replication CheckpointsIt Seems Like Only YesterdayNext-Generation Sequencing PlatformsSingle-Molecule Studies of the ReplisomeMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationTHE GENETICS OF DISULFIDE BOND METABOLISMIt Seems Like Only YesterdayMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeDNA Polymerase γ, The Mitochondrial ReplicaseRoles of Thiol-Redox Pathways in BacteriaReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationHERPES SIMPLEX VIRUS DNA REPLICATIONHERPES SIMPLEX VIRUS DNA REPLICATIONIt Seems Like Only YesterdayThinking Outside the Triangle: Replication Fidelity of the Largest RNA VirusesDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationThinking Outside the Triangle: Replication Fidelity of the Largest RNA VirusesDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveArchaeal DNA ReplicationMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeError-Prone Repair DNA Polymerases in Prokaryotes and EukaryotesEukaryotic DNA PolymerasesHorizontal Gene Transfer in Prokaryotes: Quantification and ClassificationBACTERIAL DIVERSITY BASED ON TYPE II DNA TOPOISOMERASE GENESStructural Mechanisms for Replicating DNA in EukaryotesTelomerase Mechanism of Telomere SynthesisDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeThe Very Early Stages of Biological Evolution and the Nature of the Last Common Ancestor of the Three Major Cell DomainsThe Structure and Function of Telomerase Reverse TranscriptaseSTRUCTURAL INSIGHTS INTO TRANSLATIONAL FIDELITYDNA Polymerase γ, The Mitochondrial ReplicaseEukaryotic DNA PolymerasesDNA Replication FidelityDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveProtein NMR Using Paramagnetic IonsDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveHERPES SIMPLEX VIRUS DNA REPLICATIONDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveMODIFIED OLIGONUCLEOTIDES: Synthesis and Strategy for UsersEukaryotic DNA PolymerasesDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationEukaryotic DNA PolymerasesMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeStructural Mechanisms for Replicating DNA in EukaryotesMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeEukaryotic DNA PolymerasesDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveDnaA: Controlling the Initiation of Bacterial DNA Replication and MoreEVOLUTIONARY RELATIONSHIPS AND STRUCTURAL MECHANISMS OF AAA+ PROTEINSDNA Replication in Eukaryotic CellsDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveEVOLUTIONARY RELATIONSHIPS AND STRUCTURAL MECHANISMS OF AAA+ PROTEINSArchaeal DNA Replication: Eukaryal Proteins in a Bacterial ContextDNA Replication in Eukaryotic CellsStructural Mechanisms for Replicating DNA in EukaryotesDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationEVOLUTIONARY RELATIONSHIPS AND STRUCTURAL MECHANISMS OF AAA+ PROTEINSEukaryotic DNA PolymerasesRegulation of Chromosome ReplicationComparative Protein Structure Modeling of Genes and GenomesTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSArchaeal DNA ReplicationDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveArchaeal DNA Replication: Eukaryal Proteins in a Bacterial ContextReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationStructural Mechanisms for Replicating DNA in EukaryotesDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeStructural Mechanisms for Replicating DNA in EukaryotesEVOLUTIONARY RELATIONSHIPS AND STRUCTURAL MECHANISMS OF AAA+ PROTEINSDNA MISMATCH REPAIRStructure-Driven Developments of 26S Proteasome InhibitorsMechanism and Regulation of Cytoplasmic DyneinMechanisms for Initiating Cellular DNA ReplicationAAA+ Proteases: ATP-Fueled Machines of Protein DestructionDnaA: Controlling the Initiation of Bacterial DNA Replication and MoreEVOLUTIONARY RELATIONSHIPS AND STRUCTURAL MECHANISMS OF AAA+ PROTEINSPROTEIN DEGRADATION MACHINERIES IN PLASTIDSCELLULAR FUNCTIONS, MECHANISM OF ACTION, AND REGULATION OF FTSH PROTEASEMolecular MachinesArchaeal DNA Replication: Eukaryal Proteins in a Bacterial ContextThe Establishment, Inheritance, and Function of Silenced Chromatin in Saccharomyces cerevisiaeDNA Replication in Eukaryotic CellsRUBISCO: Structure, Regulatory Interactions, and Possibilities for a Better EnzymeBioinformatics Tools for Whole GenomesRegulation of Chromosome ReplicationCell Cycle Regulation of DNA ReplicationEVOLUTIONARY RELATIONSHIPS AND STRUCTURAL MECHANISMS OF AAA+ PROTEINSDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveQuantitative Control for Stoichiometric Protein SynthesisDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectivePROGRAMMED TRANSLATIONAL FRAMESHIFTINGDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveDnaA: Controlling the Initiation of Bacterial DNA Replication and MoreDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveSingle-Molecule Studies of the ReplisomeMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationVulnerabilities on the Lagging-Strand Template: Opportunities for Mobile ElementsDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveEukaryotic Chromosome DNA Replication: Where, When, and How?Single-Molecule Studies of the ReplisomeMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationDNA Helicases, Genomic Instability, and Human Genetic DiseaseRegulation of Chromosome ReplicationReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationMechanics and Single-Molecule Interrogation of DNA RecombinationVulnerabilities on the Lagging-Strand Template: Opportunities for Mobile ElementsSingle-Molecule Views of Protein Movement on Single-Stranded DNASingle-Molecule Studies of the ReplisomeMolecular Mechanisms of Mammalian DNA Repair and the DNA Damage CheckpointsGenetic Engineering Using Homologous RecombinationThe Bacterial RecA Protein and the Recombinational DNA Repair of Stalled Replication ForksRecombinational DNA Repair of Damaged Replication Forks in Escherichia coli: QuestionsRecA-Dependent Recovery of Arrested DNA Replication ForksSingle-Molecule Studies of the ReplisomeMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeSingle-Molecule Approach to Molecular Biology in Living Bacterial CellsReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeDNA PrimasesReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationSingle-Molecule Studies of the ReplisomeMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeDnaA: Controlling the Initiation of Bacterial DNA Replication and MoreReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationDNA PrimasesDNA PrimasesReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveSingle-Molecule Studies of the ReplisomeMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationDNA PrimasesMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeDNA PrimasesMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeDNA PrimasesArchaeal DNA ReplicationDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveSingle-Molecule Studies of the ReplisomeMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeArchaeal DNA Replication: Eukaryal Proteins in a Bacterial ContextDNA PrimasesReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationEukaryotic DNA Replication ForkEukaryotic DNA Replication ForkDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveSingle-Molecule Studies of the ReplisomeMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeINTERPLAY BETWEEN DNA REPLICATION AND RECOMBINATION IN PROKARYOTESSingle-Molecule Studies of the ReplisomeMCM Proteins in DNA ReplicationTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeVulnerabilities on the Lagging-Strand Template: Opportunities for Mobile ElementsDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveSingle-Molecule Studies of the ReplisomeMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationDNA PrimasesLesion Bypass and the Reactivation of Stalled Replication ForksINTERPLAY BETWEEN DNA REPLICATION AND RECOMBINATION IN PROKARYOTESLesion Bypass and the Reactivation of Stalled Replication ForksINTERPLAY BETWEEN DNA REPLICATION AND RECOMBINATION IN PROKARYOTESDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveEnvironmental Stress and Lesion-Bypass DNA PolymerasesDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveEnvironmental Stress and Lesion-Bypass DNA PolymerasesTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSStructural Mechanisms for Replicating DNA in EukaryotesTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSArchaeal DNA ReplicationArchaeal DNA Replication: Eukaryal Proteins in a Bacterial ContextEukaryotic DNA PolymerasesTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSStructural Mechanisms for Replicating DNA in EukaryotesArchaeal DNA ReplicationEukaryotic DNA PolymerasesTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSStructural Mechanisms for Replicating DNA in EukaryotesDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeEukaryotic DNA PolymerasesReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationThinking Outside the Triangle: Replication Fidelity of the Largest RNA VirusesMotors, Switches, and Contacts in the ReplisomeEUKARYOTIC TRANSLESION SYNTHESIS DNA POLYMERASES: Specificity of Structure and FunctionEukaryotic DNA PolymerasesActive Site Tightness and Substrate Fit in DNA ReplicationSingle-Molecule Studies of the ReplisomeReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationVulnerabilities on the Lagging-Strand Template: Opportunities for Mobile ElementsDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveDnaA: Controlling the Initiation of Bacterial DNA Replication and MoreEukaryotic DNA Replication ForkMerkel Cell Carcinoma: A Virus-Induced Human CancerFlap Endonuclease 1: A Central Component of DNA MetabolismTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSREPLICATION PROTEIN A: A Heterotrimeric, Single-Stranded DNA-Binding Protein Required for Eukaryotic DNA MetabolismTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSUnusual Life Style of Giant Chlorella VirusesEukaryotic DNA PolymerasesHow Many Genes Can Make a Cell: The Minimal-Gene-Set ConceptEukaryotic DNA Polymerases in Homologous RecombinationEukaryotic DNA Ligases: Structural and Functional InsightsCell Cycle Regulation of DNA ReplicationTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSArchaeal DNA Replication: Eukaryal Proteins in a Bacterial ContextMCM Proteins in DNA ReplicationTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSRedox Chemistry in the Genome: Emergence of the [4Fe4S] Cofactor in Repair and ReplicationMCM Proteins in DNA ReplicationTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSREPLICATION PROTEIN A: A Heterotrimeric, Single-Stranded DNA-Binding Protein Required for Eukaryotic DNA MetabolismEukaryotic DNA PolymerasesTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSEukaryotic DNA PolymerasesTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSEukaryotic DNA PolymerasesTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSStructural Mechanisms for Replicating DNA in EukaryotesWanderings of a DNA Enzymologist: From DNA Polymerase to Viral LatencyDNA PrimasesDNA PrimasesEukaryotic DNA Replication ForkFlap Endonuclease 1: A Central Component of DNA MetabolismToward Maintaining the Genome: DNA Damage and Replication CheckpointsTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSREPLICATION PROTEIN A: A Heterotrimeric, Single-Stranded DNA-Binding Protein Required for Eukaryotic DNA MetabolismTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSRedox Chemistry in the Genome: Emergence of the [4Fe4S] Cofactor in Repair and ReplicationEukaryotic DNA Replication ForkArchaeal DNA ReplicationMolecular Mechanisms of Mammalian DNA Repair and the DNA Damage CheckpointsArchaeal DNA Replication: Eukaryal Proteins in a Bacterial ContextEukaryotic DNA PolymerasesEukaryotic DNA PolymerasesEukaryotic DNA PolymerasesRedox Chemistry in the Genome: Emergence of the [4Fe4S] Cofactor in Repair and ReplicationTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSOrigins of Spontaneous Mutations: Specificity and Directionality of Base-Substitution, Frameshift, and Sequence-Substitution MutagenesesActive Site Tightness and Substrate Fit in DNA ReplicationEukaryotic DNA PolymerasesEukaryotic DNA Replication ForkRegulation of Chromosome ReplicationTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSMechanisms for Initiating Cellular DNA ReplicationEukaryotic Chromosome DNA Replication: Where, When, and How?Cell Cycle Regulation of DNA ReplicationDNA Replication in Eukaryotic CellsRegulation of Chromosome ReplicationMCM Proteins in DNA ReplicationMATING-TYPE GENE SWITCHING IN SACCHAROMYCES CEREVISIAETHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSEukaryotic DNA Replication ForkMolecular Mechanisms of Mammalian DNA Repair and the DNA Damage CheckpointsEukaryotic DNA PolymerasesRegulation of Chromosome ReplicationTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSToward Maintaining the Genome: DNA Damage and Replication CheckpointsRegulation of Chromosome ReplicationTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSMolecular Mechanisms of Mammalian DNA Repair and the DNA Damage CheckpointsEukaryotic DNA PolymerasesStructural Mechanisms for Replicating DNA in EukaryotesEukaryotic DNA Replication ForkEukaryotic DNA Polymerases in Homologous RecombinationArchaeal DNA ReplicationCell Cycle Regulation of DNA ReplicationMolecular Mechanisms of Mammalian DNA Repair and the DNA Damage CheckpointsEukaryotic DNA PolymerasesRegulation of Chromosome ReplicationRedox Chemistry in the Genome: Emergence of the [4Fe4S] Cofactor in Repair and ReplicationStructural Mechanisms for Replicating DNA in EukaryotesTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSREPLICATION PROTEIN A: A Heterotrimeric, Single-Stranded DNA-Binding Protein Required for Eukaryotic DNA MetabolismStructural Mechanisms for Replicating DNA in EukaryotesDNA Mismatch Repair: Molecular Mechanisms and Biological FunctionEukaryotic DNA PolymerasesTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSStructural Mechanisms for Replicating DNA in EukaryotesMolecular Mechanisms of Mammalian DNA Repair and the DNA Damage CheckpointsEukaryotic DNA PolymerasesEukaryotic DNA Replication ForkMutations Arising During Repair of Chromosome BreaksStructural Mechanisms for Replicating DNA in EukaryotesEukaryotic DNA Replication ForkEukaryotic DNA Polymerases in Homologous RecombinationCell Cycle Regulation of DNA ReplicationMolecular Mechanisms of Mammalian DNA Repair and the DNA Damage CheckpointsRegulation of Chromosome ReplicationEukaryotic DNA Replication ForkFlap Endonuclease 1: A Central Component of DNA MetabolismEukaryotic DNA Replication ForkEukaryotic DNA Polymerases in Homologous RecombinationHistone Variants: The Nexus of Developmental Decisions and Epigenetic MemoryH3–H4 Histone Chaperone PathwaysThe Inherent Asymmetry of DNA ReplicationDNA Triplet Repeat Expansion and Mismatch RepairHistone Chaperones: Assisting Histone Traffic and Nucleosome DynamicsThe Establishment, Inheritance, and Function of Silenced Chromatin in Saccharomyces cerevisiaeSignaling and Transcription in T Helper DevelopmentStatistics of Extreme Events in Fluid Flows and WavesDNA Triplet Repeat Expansion and Mismatch RepairThree-Dimensional Transformations for Goal-Directed ActionFlapping and Bending Bodies Interacting with Fluid FlowsAttention, Intention, and Priority in the Parietal LobeCognitive Neural ProstheticsDISSECTING INSECT FLIGHTIMMERSED BOUNDARY METHODSThe Establishment, Inheritance, and Function of Silenced Chromatin in Saccharomyces cerevisiaeIntentional Maps in Posterior Parietal CortexMechanisms for Initiating Cellular DNA ReplicationCell Cycle Regulation of DNA ReplicationArchaeal DNA Replication: Eukaryal Proteins in a Bacterial ContextDNA Replication in Eukaryotic CellsStructural Mechanisms for Replicating DNA in EukaryotesMechanisms for Initiating Cellular DNA ReplicationCell Cycle Regulation of DNA ReplicationEVOLUTIONARY RELATIONSHIPS AND STRUCTURAL MECHANISMS OF AAA+ PROTEINSStructural Mechanisms for Replicating DNA in EukaryotesMechanisms for Initiating Cellular DNA ReplicationEukaryotic Chromosome DNA Replication: Where, When, and How?Cell Cycle Regulation of DNA ReplicationArchaeal DNA Replication: Eukaryal Proteins in a Bacterial ContextDNA Replication in Eukaryotic CellsRegulation of Chromosome ReplicationStructure and Function of Hexameric HelicasesMCM Proteins in DNA ReplicationTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSCell Cycle Regulation of DNA ReplicationArchaeal DNA Replication: Eukaryal Proteins in a Bacterial ContextDNA Replication in Eukaryotic CellsCell Cycle Regulation of DNA ReplicationStructural Mechanisms for Replicating DNA in EukaryotesConditional Degrons for Controlling Protein Expression at the Protein LevelThe Inherent Asymmetry of DNA ReplicationEukaryotic Chromosome DNA Replication: Where, When, and How?Cell Cycle Regulation of DNA ReplicationStructure and Mechanism of Helicases and Nucleic Acid TranslocasesDNA Replication in Eukaryotic CellsH3–H4 Histone Chaperone PathwaysRegulation of Chromosome ReplicationArchaeal DNA ReplicationMechanisms for Initiating Cellular DNA ReplicationEukaryotic Chromosome DNA Replication: Where, When, and How?Cell Cycle Regulation of DNA ReplicationStructure and Mechanism of Helicases and Nucleic Acid TranslocasesArchaeal DNA Replication: Eukaryal Proteins in a Bacterial ContextDNA Replication in Eukaryotic CellsStructure and Function of Hexameric HelicasesStructural Mechanisms for Replicating DNA in EukaryotesArchaeal DNA ReplicationMechanisms for Initiating Cellular DNA ReplicationEukaryotic Chromosome DNA Replication: Where, When, and How?Cell Cycle Regulation of DNA ReplicationStructure and Mechanism of Helicases and Nucleic Acid TranslocasesArchaeal DNA Replication: Eukaryal Proteins in a Bacterial ContextThe Inherent Asymmetry of DNA ReplicationDNA Replication in Eukaryotic CellsRegulation of Chromosome ReplicationMCM Proteins in DNA ReplicationINITIATION OF DNA REPLICATION IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSRegulation of Chromosome ReplicationMCM Proteins in DNA ReplicationINITIATION OF DNA REPLICATION IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSEukaryotic Chromosome DNA Replication: Where, When, and How?Cell Cycle Regulation of DNA ReplicationCell Cycle Regulation of DNA ReplicationEukaryotic DNA PolymerasesDNA Replication in Eukaryotic CellsMolecular Mechanisms of Mammalian DNA Repair and the DNA Damage CheckpointsToward Maintaining the Genome: DNA Damage and Replication CheckpointsCell Cycle Regulation of DNA ReplicationSurviving the Breakup: The DNA Damage CheckpointMolecular Mechanisms of Mammalian DNA Repair and the DNA Damage CheckpointsSurviving the Breakup: The DNA Damage CheckpointMolecular Mechanisms of Mammalian DNA Repair and the DNA Damage CheckpointsFunctions, Regulation, and Therapeutic Implications of the ATR Checkpoint PathwayCell Cycle Regulation of DNA ReplicationSurviving the Breakup: The DNA Damage CheckpointFunctions, Regulation, and Therapeutic Implications of the ATR Checkpoint PathwayEukaryotic Chromosome DNA Replication: Where, When, and How?Surviving the Breakup: The DNA Damage CheckpointCellular Responses to DNA Damage: One Signal, Multiple ChoicesOrganization of Chromosomal DNA by SMC ComplexesCohesin: Its Roles and MechanismsTHE STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF SMC AND KLEISIN COMPLEXESError-Prone Repair DNA Polymerases in Prokaryotes and EukaryotesDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisThe Molecular Basis of Sister-Chromatid CohesionMore AR articles citing this referenceFigure 1Components of cellular replicases. The table lists the three replicase components in the well-defined systems ofEscherichia coli, eukaryotes, Archaea, and T4 phage. The scheme below is a generalized mechanism of replicase action. A multiprotein clamp-loader couples ATP binding and hydrolysis to loading of a ring-shaped processivity clamp that is then used by the replicative polymerase as a tether to the DNA template.
Figure Locations...The sheer size of these molecules may explain why all cells utilize a clamp loader to position a circular sliding clamp on DNA that tethers the DNA polymerases to their long substrates for highly processive synthesis (see Figure 1)....
...as does the T4 bacteriophage (see the table in Figure 1) [reviewed in (7, 28), ...
Figure 2Structure and dynamics of the β sliding clamp. (a,b) Crystal structure of the β dimer with modeled double-stranded DNA through the central channel (courtesy of D. Jeruzalmi and J. Kuriyan). Panel (b) highlights the two “faces” of the ring. The C-terminal face (right) is implicated in many of the interactions of β with other proteins. (c) Superposition of one β subunit from the β dimer structure (purple) and the β monomer from the β1δ1crystal structure (yellow), using domain II as a reference. (d) Model of an open β clamp made by arranging two β monomer structures from β1δ1to create one dimer interface [described in (67)]. Panels (c) and (d) adapted from (67), copyright 2001, with permission from Elsevier.
Figure Locations...This hypothesis was quickly proven by structure analysis (3) (Figure 2)....
...The crystal structure of the β dimer (3) shows that the two crescent-shaped protomers form a ring with a large central channel of ∼35 Å in diameter that may easily accommodate double-stranded (ds) DNA modeled inside (Figure 2a,b)....
...leading to a shallower crescent shape in the monomer (67) (see Figure 2c)....
...allowing tension between the domains to relax and producing a gap for DNA-strand passage (see Figure 2d)....
Figure 3Crystal structure of theE. coliγ3δ1δ′1complex. (a) Isolated subunits from the structure of the complex, domains I–III noted [adapted from (87), copyright 2002 Nature Publishing Group (http://www.nature.com)]. (b) Side view of γ3δδ′ (left). The β-interacting helix of δ is marked in yellow. View from the C termini of γ3δδ′ (right) [adapted from (70), copyright 2001, with permission from Elsevier]. (c) The ATP sites of the ring-shaped γ complex are located at subunit interfaces, as illustrated in the cartoon (right) and taken from the structure of ATP Site 1 (left) with ATP (purple) modeled against the P-loop (blue). The Ser-Arg-Cys (SRC) motif of δ′, conserved in all clamp loaders, points its arginine (red) toward the γ phosphate of ATP [adapted with permission from (89)].
Figure Locations...The five subunits of E. coli γ3δδ′ are arranged in a circular fashion (70) (Figure 3b)....
...and oligomerization is mediated mainly by the C-terminal domain III (Figure 3a,b)....
...The N-terminal domains I and II of all five subunits adopt the chain fold of the AAA+ (ATPases associated with a variety of cellular activities) family (Figure 3a) [reviewed in (86, 87)]....
...The ATP sites of γ complex are located at subunit interfaces and are supplemented with residues from the adjacent subunit (see Figure 3c)....
...as seen in the left panel of Figure 3c (red residue) with an ATP molecule modeled along the phosphate-binding loop (blue)....
...creating a gap in the N-terminal portion of the ring (70) (Figure 3b)....
Figure 4Organization and dynamics of theE. colireplisome. (a) The τ subunit of DNA polymerase III holoenzyme is comprised of the clamp-loader domains I–III (γ sequence) and the replisome organization domains IV and V that bind the DnaB helicase and Pol III core, respectively. (b) Polymerase cycling at the replication fork. As the replisome advances, the clamp loader loads a β clamp on an RNA primer (pink) synthesized by DnaG (upper right). When the lagging-strand polymerase replicates to a nick, it dissociates from DNA and β (lower right) and cycles to the newly loaded β clamp (lower left).
Figure Locations...which contains the γ sequence plus a unique 23.6 kDa C-terminal region (τc) (Figure 4a)....
...At least two polymerases are required for concurrent synthesis of leading and lagging strands (Figure 4b)....
...but also connect the replicase to the DnaB helicase (see Figure 4b)....
...An overview of the lagging-strand cycle is illustrated in Figure 4b....
...The 1–3 kb Okazaki fragment will be completed within a few seconds (Figure 4b, ...
Figure 5Three examples of protein trafficking on sliding clamps. Interactions with the β clamp fromE. coli. (a) The γ complex clamp loader associates tightly with β when bound to ATP. DNA triggers ATP hydrolysis, resulting in low affinity for β and DNA. (b) When Pol III, the replicative polymerase, encounters a lesion in the DNA template, it stalls, unable to overcome its inherent fidelity to incorporate opposite a damaged base. Stalling allows an error-prone polymerase, such as Pol IV (red) passively traveling on β, an opportunity to trade places with Pol III on β to replicate past the lesion. [Adapted with permission from (135).] (c) Pol III maintains a tight grip on β via the polymerase C terminus. However, when it completely replicates its substrate DNA, the polymerase must release from β to recycle to the next primed site. The τ subunit modulates this interaction, binding the polymerase C tail only when no more single-stranded template is present. This severs the connection between the polymerase and the clamp [adapted with permission from (134), copyright 2003, National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A.].
Figure Locations...This protein trafficking event is facilitated by the fact that ATP hydrolysis ejects the clamp loader from β (Figure 5a) (71)....
...It is possible that in this binding mode Pol IV may bind to β simultaneously with Pol III (see Figure 5b)....
...τc turns “on” and separates core from β (see Figure 5c).These switch processes explain how interactions with the clamp are modulated by ATP or DNA structure to promote the trafficking of different proteins on sliding clamps to ensure progression of replication....
Figure 6Structures of the eukaryotic clamp and clamp loader fromSaccharomyces cerevisiae. (a) View of the C-terminal face of PCNA. The ring-shaped PCNA is a head-to-tail trimer of a two-domain monomer. The sixfold pseudosymmetry of the β clamp is evident in PCNA as well. (b) The structure of replication factor C (RFC) bound to PCNA reveals the structural similarity between RFC and γ complex. RFC binds to the C-terminal face of PCNA. (c–e) The RFC subunits are arranged in a helix that tracks the minor groove of B-form DNA modeled through the PCNA ring. (d) In this cartoon, the 5′ terminus of a recessed primer template is positioned to exit the central channel of the clamp and clamp loader through the gap between RFC1 and RFC5. (e) N-terminal regions of the five RFC subunits and the PCNA ring from the RFC-PCNA structure. Two conserved helices in each RFC subunit (yellow) are in position to interact with DNA (orange/green) that passes through the central channel of PCNA (gray) with the 5′ terminus (green spheres) exiting between RFC1 and RFC5. [Adapted with permission from (85), copyright 2004 Nature Publishing Group (http://www.nature.com).]Figure Locations...except PCNA must trimerize to form a six-domain ring (Figure 6a)....
...The RFC-ATPγS-PCNA crystal structure has provided a detailed view of how a clamp loader interacts with its cognate clamp (see Figure 6b)....
...with the helical axis passing through the central channel of the closed PCNA (see Figure 6c,e)....
...Each RFC subunit has two α-helices that are oriented so their positive dipole tracks the minor groove phosphate backbone of DNA modeled into the structure (Figure 6e)....
...perhaps assisted by a positive patch on the RFC1 surface (see Figure 6e)....
Figure 7Hypothetical arrangement of proteins at the eukaryotic replication fork. The hexameric MCM complex encircles the leading strand. In this cartoon, Pol δ is placed on the leading strand and Pol ε on the lagging, with RFC bridging the two polymerases and helicase. Pol α/primase action places it on the lagging strand along with RPA bound to the looping single-stranded DNA. Other factors involved in replication and known to bind certain proteins at the replication fork include Cdc45, Sld2, Sld3, Dpb11, and the heterotetrameric GINS complex.
Figure Locations...thereby placing the MCMs on the leading strand (see Figure 7)....
...In the scheme of Figure 7, RFC is proposed to act as a scaffold similar to the γ/τ complex in E. coli, ...
...protein interaction studies indicate a network as illustrated schematically in Figure 7....
TABLE 1Escherichia colireplisome components and associated functionsaTABLE 2Eukaryotic replisome componentsaInformation concerns a protein complex.
Most Downloaded from this journalThe Hippo Pathway: Biology and PathophysiologyShenghong Ma, Zhipeng Meng, Rui Chen, Kun-Liang GuanVol. 88, 2019AbstractThe Hippo pathway was initially discovered in Drosophila melanogaster as a key regulator of tissue growth. It is an evolutionarily conserved signaling cascade regulating numerous biological processes, including cell growth and fate decision, organ size ...
Read MoreFigure 1: Core components of the Hippo pathway in mammalian cells. The Hippo pathway activity controls the dynamic localization of YAP/TAZ between nucleus and cytoplasm. (a) When the Hippo pathway is ...
Figure 2: Mechanical cues regulate YAP/TAZ activities through Rho GTPase and the Hippo pathway. Cell–cell contact, cell stretching, cell tension, extracellular matrix (ECM) stiffness, and changes in c...
Figure 3: The Hippo pathway integrates multiple signals to regulate the activity of YAP/TAZ. The LATS kinase activity is controlled by cell polarity and cell adhesion through KIBRA/NF2, tight junction...
Figure 4: YAP/TAZ and cancer hallmarks. The Hippo pathway effectors YAP/TAZ directly or indirectly control multiple cancer hallmarks, including proliferation, survival, evading growth suppressors, rep...
CRISPR/Cas9 in Genome Editing and BeyondHaifeng Wang, Marie La Russa, Lei S. QiVol. 85, 2016AbstractThe Cas9 protein (CRISPR-associated protein 9), derived from type II CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats) bacterial immune systems, is emerging as a powerful tool for engineering the genome in diverse organisms. As an RNA-...
Read MoreFigure 1: CRISPR-associated protein 9 (Cas9)-mediated sequence-specific genomic editing. (a) Comparison of programmable sequence-specific genome editing nucleases. (Top) Zinc-finger nucleases (ZFNs) a...
Figure 2: Nuclease-deactivated Cas9 (dCas9)-mediated sequence-specific gene regulation. (a) CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) strategies. Repression can occur with dCas9 alone in bacteria, which stericall...
Figure 3: Applications of CRISPR-associated protein 9 (Cas9) in gene editing, gene regulation, epigenome editing, and genomic imaging. (a) Cas9-mediated site-specific genome editing has a variety of a...
Mitochondrial Machineries for Protein Import and AssemblyNils Wiedemann and Nikolaus PfannerVol. 86, 2017AbstractMitochondria are essential organelles with numerous functions in cellular metabolism and homeostasis. Most of the >1,000 different mitochondrial proteins are synthesized as precursors in the cytosol and are imported into mitochondria by five transport ...
Read MoreFigure 1: Overview of the five major protein import pathways of mitochondria. Presequence-carrying preproteins are imported by the translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane (TOM) and the presequ...
Figure 2: The presequence pathway into the mitochondrial inner membrane (IM) and matrix. The translocase of the outer membrane (TOM) consists of three receptor proteins, the channel-forming protein To...
Figure 3: Role of the oxidase assembly (OXA) translocase in protein sorting. Proteins synthesized by mitochondrial ribosomes are exported into the inner membrane (IM) by the OXA translocase; the ribos...
Figure 4: Carrier pathway into the inner membrane. The precursors of the hydrophobic metabolite carriers are synthesized without a cleavable presequence. The precursors are bound to cytosolic chaperon...
Figure 5: Mitochondrial intermembrane space import and assembly (MIA) machinery. Many intermembrane space (IMS) proteins contain characteristic cysteine motifs. The precursors are kept in a reduced an...
Figure 6: Biogenesis of β-barrel proteins of the outer mitochondrial membrane. The precursors of β-barrel proteins are initially imported by the translocase of the outer membrane (TOM), bind to small ...
Figure 7: The dual role of mitochondrial distribution and morphology protein 10 (Mdm10) in protein assembly and organelle contact sites. Mdm10 associates with the sorting and assembly machinery (SAM) ...
Figure 8: Multiple import pathways for integral α-helical proteins of the mitochondrial outer membrane. The precursors of proteins with an N-terminal signal anchor sequence are typically inserted into...
Figure 9: The mitochondrial contact site and cristae organizing system (MICOS) interacts with protein translocases. MICOS consists of two core subunits, Mic10 and Mic60. Mic10 forms large oligomers th...
ExosomesD. Michiel Pegtel and Stephen J. GouldVol. 88, 2019AbstractExosomes are small, single-membrane, secreted organelles of ∼30 to ∼200 nm in diameter that have the same topology as the cell and are enriched in selected proteins, lipids, nucleic acids, and glycoconjugates. Exosomes contain an array of membrane-...
Read MoreFigure 1: Exosomes are heterogeneous in size, heterogeneous in composition, and enriched in membrane-associated, high-order oligomeric protein complexes. Although it is likely that no exosome contains...
Figure 2: Exosomes bud from endosome and plasma membranes. Exosome biogenesis occurs by three modes: () vesicle budding into discrete endosomes that mature into multivesicular bodies, which release ex...
THE GREEN FLUORESCENT PROTEINRoger Y. TsienVol. 67, 1998AbstractIn just three years, the green fluorescent protein (GFP) from the jellyfish Aequorea victoria has vaulted from obscurity to become one of the most widely studied and exploited proteins in biochemistry and cell biology. Its amazing ability to generate a ...
Read MoreFigure 1: GFP sequences. (Line 1) The wild-type (WT) gfp10 gene as originally cloned and sequenced by Prasher et al (10). (Line 2) A popular humanized version (EGFP, Clontech Laboratories, Palo Alto,...
Figure 2: Mechanism proposed by Cubitt et al (22) for the intramolecular biosynthesis of the GFP chromophore, with rate constants estimated for the Ser65 → Thr mutant by Reid & Flynn (23) and Heim et...
Figure 3: Stereoview of the three-dimensional structure of GFP (30), showing 11 β-strands forming a hollow cylinder through which is threaded a helix bearing the chromophore, shown in ball-and-stick ...
Figure 4: Amino acid side chains, main chain carbonyls and amides, and solvent waters in the immediate vicinity of the chromophore of S65T GFP (30). Side chains are labeled with the one-letter code f...
Figure 5: Fluorescence excitation and emission spectra (solid and dashed lines, respectively) for typical members of the six major classes of GFP mutants, together with the chromophore structures bel...
Figure 6: Location on the GFP crystal structure (30) of the most important sites that improve folding at 37°C. The amino acids shown in space-filling representation are the wild-type residues that ar...
