old id = 2347
Psychedelic drugs: neurobiology and potential for treatment of psychiatric disorders | Nature Reviews Neuroscience
2020
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583-020-0367-2

Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript.
AdvertisementPsychedelic drugs: neurobiology and potential for treatment of psychiatric disordersNature Reviews Neurosciencevolume21,pages611–624 (2020)Cite this article17kAccesses72Citations463AltmetricMetricsdetailsSubjectsAbstractRenewed interest in the use of psychedelics in the treatment of psychiatric disorders warrants a better understanding of the neurobiological mechanisms underlying the effects of these substances. After a hiatus of about 50 years, state-of-the art studies have recently begun to close important knowledge gaps by elucidating the mechanisms of action of psychedelics with regard to their effects on receptor subsystems, systems-level brain activity and connectivity, and cognitive and emotional processing. In addition, functional studies have shown that changes in self-experience, emotional processing and social cognition may contribute to the potential therapeutic effects of psychedelics. These discoveries provide a scientific road map for the investigation and application of psychedelic substances in psychiatry.
You have full access to this article via your institution.
IntroductionDuring the 1950s and 1960s, classic psychedelics (also known as serotonergic hallucinogens) such as lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) and phosphoryloxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine (psilocybin) were extensively investigated in psycholytic (low dose) and psychedelic (low to high dose)substance-assisted psychotherapy, resulting in more than 1,000 scientific papers and reports that included findings from about 40,000 subjects1. Although these early, largely explorative studies used various psychotherapeutic techniques and had serious methodological flaws by contemporary standards, four systematic reviews of these early clinical studies reported impressive improvement rates in patients with various forms of depression and neuroses2,3,4, anxiety disorders2,4, personality disorders2,4, sexual dysfunctions2,4and alcohol dependence2,4,5.
During the counterculture movement in the United States in the mid-1960s, the use of psychotropic drugs became popularized. This led LSD and related drugs to be placed in Schedule I (Controlled Substances Act, 1970) in the United States and in an equivalent category in most other countries. Thus, human research with psychedelics became severely restricted, leaving many questions unexplored6. However, with the development of modern neuroimaging techniques in the 1990s, renewed interest in the investigation of psychedelic substances has emerged7. Current behavioural and neuroimaging data show that psychedelics induce their psychological effects (Box1) primarily via 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin) type 2A (5-HT2A) receptor activation and modulate neural circuits involved in mood and affective disorders. Additional findings show that psychedelics enhance glutamate-driven neuroplasticity in animals and may provide a novel mechanism for the lasting symptom improvements observed in recent clinical trials in patients with psychiatric disorders.
In the present article, we review the advances that have taken place in recent years. We focus on new discoveries about the neurobiology and neuropharmacology of psychedelic substances and discuss potential mechanisms through which they may exert therapeutic effects in the light of modern neuroscience concepts. Discrepancies between research results and knowledge gaps are highlighted, and potential new directions are discussed. We conclude the Review by summarizing the implications of these findings for understanding cognitive processes in health and disease, the discovery of potential trans-diagnostic treatment mechanisms and the development of novel therapeutics.
Box 1 Psychometrical assessment of altered states of consciousnessQuantifying altered states of consciousness was problematic in the early years of psychedelic research. However, over recent years, several psychometric instruments have been developed for assessing various aspects of consciousness. The 5-Dimensional Altered States of Consciousness Questionnaire is one of the most widely used and validated rating scales to measure the subjective response to psychedelics170,171,172. This questionnaire assesses five core dimensions of altered states of consciousness that can be further described by 11 order scores171. The five core dimensions are as follows:Oceanic Boundlessness: referring to positively experienced loosening or loss of self/ego boundaries that is associated with changes in the sense of time and emotions ranging from heightened mood to sublime happiness and feelings of oneness with the environment. This dimension resembles the so-called mystical-type experience also reported in religious exaltation.
Visionary Restructuralization: referring to perceptual alterations such as illusions and hallucinations, synaesthesia, changed meaning of percepts, increased imagination and facilitated memory recollection.
Dread of Ego Dissolution: referring to negatively experienced loss of self/ego boundaries associated with anxiety over the loss of control over thinking and body, and thought disturbances that may result in delusional thinking and/or panic. This response type occurs rarely at moderate to medium doses of a psychedelic in a controlled clinical setting111, but can occur at higher doses (psilocybin >25 mg, lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) >200 µg)144,173.
Acoustic Alterations: hypersensitivity to sound or noise and auditory hallucinations.
Altered Vigilance: changes in the level of alertness.
The neurobiology of psychedelicsReceptor activation and signallingThe classic psychedelics comprise three main classes of chemicals. The first class are plant-derived indoleamines, includingN,N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT), 5-methoxy-DMT (5-MeO-DMT), psilocybin and 4-hydroxy-DMT (psilocin, the active metabolite of psilocybin). The second class are phenylalkylamines, including mescaline (derived from the peyote cactus) and synthetic ‘amphetamines’ such as 2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodoamphetamine (DOI) and 2,5-dimethoxy-4-bromoamphetamine (DOB). The third group of compounds are semi-synthetic ergolines, such as LSD8. The phenylalkylamines are selective agonists of 5-HT2receptors, including 5-HT2A, 5-HT2Band 5-HT2Creceptors9. The indoleamines and ergolines act as partial agonists upon 5-HT1, 5-HT2, 5-HT6and 5-HT7receptors8. LSD and other ergolines also act upon D1 and D2 dopamine receptors and adrenergic receptors8.
Compelling evidence indicates that the activation of 5-HT2Areceptors located in cortical and subcortical structures is a unifying mechanism through which psychedelics mediate their various behavioural and psychological effects in animals10, including humans11,12,13,14,15(Fig.
1). Specifically, pharmacological studies have shown that the ‘head twitch response’ in rodents, a behavioural proxy for the effects of hallucinogens on humans9,10, depends on 5-HT2Abut not on 5-HT2Cor 5-HT2Breceptor stimulation9,16,17,18,19. Consistent with these animal studies, the administration of the 5-HT2Areceptor antagonist ketanserin abolishes virtually all of the subjective effects of psilocybin, LSD and DMT in humans11,12,13,14,15,20,21. Moreover, the psychedelic effects of psilocybin in humans have been shown to correlate with 5-HT2Areceptor occupancy measured viapositron emission tomographyin the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and other cortical regions22,23. However, it is important to note that some studies also suggest that 5-HT1Areceptor activation contributes to the visual24and attention-disrupting25effects of psilocybin in humans.
The known effects of psychedelic drugs on the neurons comprising the central brain networks responsible for bottom-up sensory input via the thalamus to the cortex and top-down cortico-striato-thalamic, cortico-thalamic and/or cortico-cortical control of information processing. The schematic is based on data mostly obtained from studies of lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) and 2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodoamphetamine (DOI) in animals, as well as some studies of the actions of LSD and psilocybin in humans. LSD increases extracellular glutamate levels in the prefrontal cortex via stimulation of postsynaptic 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin) type 2A (5-HT2A) receptors on deep layer 5 pyramidal (L5p) neurons39,163(stage 1) and on the L6p neurons (stage 2) projecting to L5p neurons as well as via activation of presynaptic 5-HT2Areceptors (stage 3) on specific and non-specific thalamocortical afferents41,43,61,164,165,166. Psychedelics such as LSD can also stimulate 5-HT1Areceptors located on the hillock of L5p or L6p neurons (stage 4) and on cortical GABAergic interneurons (stage 5), resulting in both inhibition and disinhibition of prefrontal pyramidal cell activity34,39,167. In addition, LSD and DOI are potent partial agonists at cortical (stage 6) and presumably also subcortical (striatal or palladial) (stage 7) 5-HT2Areceptors in GABAergic interneurons168. Despite these partially inhibitory mechanisms, the LSD or DOI-induced increase in glutamate release produces a marked net excitatory effect on L5p neurons34,39,164,169and promotes synaptic plasticity via AMPA and NMDA receptor-dependent mechanisms41,43,61. L5p neurons influence both cortical and thalamic processing and play a central role in coupling cortico-cortical (stage 8) and thalamo-cortical (stage 9) loops of information streams with each other51, providing a mechanism through which it is thought the state and content of consciousness may be coupled42. It has therefore been suggested that psychedelics affect this extended thalamo-cortical broadcasting system, and thus consciousness as a whole, by simultaneously producing sensory ‘flooding’ due to reduced thalamic gating of interoceptive and enteroceptive inputs and by altering the meaning of percepts due to disrupted cortical–cortical interactions170,171. In this model, thalamic gating is thought to be under the control of glutamatergic cortico-striatal and cortico-thalamic pathways projecting to the thalamus in addition to being under the modulatory influence of serotonergic projections from the raphe to several components of the cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical loops51. mGluR, metabotropic glutamate receptor; NSN, non-specific thalamic nuclei; SN, specific thalamic nuclei.
It has been demonstrated that hallucinogenic and non-hallucinogenic 5-HT2Areceptor agonists, such as LSD and lisuride, respectively, activate different intracellular signalling pathways in cortical pyramidal neurons26. Although both LSD and lisuride activate signalling via Gq/11subunits, only LSD additionally increased the expression of early growth response protein 1 (EGR1) and EGR2 by activating Gi/osubunits and the protein tyrosine kinase SRC27. Further investigation of this functional selectivity may inform the development of novel, possibly more specific, compounds with therapeutic properties and could help to resolve long-standing questions about whether non-hallucinogenic 5-HT2Aagonists can also exert antidepressant or neuroplastic effects in humans7.
In addition to its effects on serotonin signalling, psilocybin has been found to increase striatal dopamine concentrations in humans, with these increases correlating with euphoria and the emergence of depersonalization28. Although psilocybin does not act directly on dopamine receptors and may increase striatal dopamine concentration via 5-HT1Areceptor activation29, LSD does show high intrinsic activity at dopamine D2 receptors8. In animal studies, LSD’s activation of dopamine receptors has been linked to its behavioural effects30, but the relevance of dopaminergic stimulation for psychedelic effects in humans is less clear31. Studies specifically blocking dopaminergic receptors after LSD administration, which would help to resolve this issue, are currently lacking.
Regulation of neuronal activityIn humans, 5-HT2Areceptors are highly expressed in the apical dendrites of layer 5 pyramidal (L5p) neurons in the cortex and are particularly enriched in the PFC32,33,34. A smaller proportion are located presynaptically on thalamocortical afferents projecting to the neocortex34. In addition, inhibitory GABAergic interneurons in the cortex and subcortical structures also express 5-HT2Areceptors34. In vitro electrophysiological recordings have shown that DOI or LSD increases the frequency and amplitude of spontaneousexcitatory postsynaptic potentialsand excitatory postsynaptic currents in L5p neurons in the rat medial PFC and other cortical regions by activating 5-HT2Areceptors35,36. In vivo, DOI produced a striking net-excitatory effect (a 481% increase in the mean firing rate (spikes/s)) on most pyramidal neurons (38%) examined in the rat PFC, although a lower proportion of L5p neurons (27%) were also inhibited via activation of GABAergic interneurons37. In another study, a lower dose of DOI evoked a marked activation of neuronal populations in the rat orbitofrontal cortex and anterior cingulate cortex, whereas higher doses tended to inhibit these regions38,39. Thus, it appears that psychedelics may exert different modulatory effects across cortical regions, depending on the dose, the specific drug used and — presumably — the density of 5-HT2Areceptors in different neuronal populations.
The increase of L5p neuron activity in the PFC upon treatment with LSD or DOI was shown to be mediated by an increase of glutamate release and a subsequent activation of postsynaptic AMPA receptors35,39,40,41. It is widely believed that the increase in extracellular glutamate is due torecurrent network activitytriggered by an activation of postsynaptic 5-HT2Areceptors located in the deep L5p and L6p neurons that project to L5p neurons27,39,40(Fig.
1). However, prefrontal L5p neurons receive excitatory glutamatergic input not only from higher and lower cortical areas but also from specific and non-specific thalamic projections, and send output back to both the cortex and thalamus35,42(Fig.
1). One recent study indicates that activation of presynaptic 5-HT2Areceptors located on these thalamocortical afferents also contributes to the psychedelic-induced modulation of glutamatergic transmission in the PFC35. In support of this idea, it has been shown that activation of presynaptic 5-HT2Areceptors located in thalamocortical synapses by DOI increases NMDA receptor-mediated transmission43. Interestingly, the concomitant activation of the apical compartment of L5p neurons (which receives input from higher cortical areas and non-specific thalamic nuclei) and of the basal compartment (which receives input from lower cortical areas, such as the visual cortex) markedly increased the burst firing of L5p neurons44,45and correlated positively with the animal’s stimulus detection behaviour42. Thus, it has been proposed that L5p neurons have the unique ability to couple bottom-up cortico-thalamic and top-down cortico-cortical loops of informational streams with each other42,45.
Within the network outlined above, the PFC is known to be involved in the control of high-level cognitive and emotional processes, and in enabling a sense of self12,46,47,48,49. Disruption of the functional integrity between or hyperactivity within components of this network has been associated with the dissolution of self-boundaries and alterations of cognitive and emotional processing in psychedelic states50,51(Box1) and has also been linked to the pathophysiology of psychotic disorders.
Neuroplastic effectsIn addition to its acute effects, 5-HT2Areceptor activation has been shown to driveneuroplastic adaptionsthat have been proposed to underlie the persisting symptom improvements observed in psychiatric disorders52,53,54. The finding that LSD and DOI increase levels of glutamate8,55,56and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)57in the rat cortex has led to the hypothesis that psychedelics promote neuroplasticity via glutamate-driven increased AMPA receptor activation7. AMPA receptor activation has been shown to increase the release of BDNF58, which in turn is essential for neuronal remodelling associated with learning and memory in both animals59and humans60.
In fact, several recent studies showed that psychedelics induce both structural and functional changes in cortical neurons in mice in vitro and in vivo52,53,54. These changes include increased synaptogenesis, which appears to be mediated through activation of 5-HT2Areceptor, tyrosine receptor kinase B (TRKB) and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signalling pathways54. Two recent studies in mice also showed that stimulation of postsynaptic 5-HT2Areceptors by DOI gates synaptic plasticity via AMPA receptor-dependentlong-term depressionof L5p neuron transmission61whereas stimulation of presynaptic 5-HT2Areceptors located in thalamocortical synapses gates neuroplasticity and associative learning via NMDA receptor-dependent mechanisms43. In animals, neuroplastic adaptions have also been associated with the ability of psychedelics to facilitate the extinction of fear memory52,53.
The capacity of psychedelics to induce functional and structural neuroplasticity could lead to a shift in the approach to treatment of various psychiatric disorders. However, whether the neuroplastic effects of psychedelics observed in animal studies are replicable in humans and are responsible for the long-lasting symptom improvements seen in recent clinical studies requires further investigation.
Altered activity and connectivityAs discussed above, 5-HT2Areceptor activation can have profound neuromodulatory effects. These effects can manifest as changes in measures of connectivity assessed with neuroimaging techniques such asfunctional MRI(fMRI). There are numerous different neuroimaging approaches for the measurement of connectivity. Functional connectivity approaches assess the correlation between the signals observed in different brain areas, whereas effective connectivity approaches such asdynamic causal modellingprovide models of neuronal coupling (that is, the effect of one neural system on another). Alternatively, the neuromodulatory effects of psychedelics can be expressed in terms of changes in fast neuronal dynamics and assessed with electrophysiological measures.
Recent neuroimaging and electrophysiological studies of the human brain in its resting state have revealed psychedelic-induced systems-level changes that have given rise to various hypotheses regarding the neural underpinnings of psychedelic states. The empirical evidence from these studies described below suggests that changes in thalamic gating, between-network and within-network integration and temporal dynamics are induced by psychedelic compounds. Further studies investigating the neurobiological correlates of specific psychedelic-induced emotional and cognitive alterations are discussed in later sections.
Evidence for altered thalamic gatingWithin cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical (CSTC) feedback loops, the thalamus is crucial in the gating of the flow of internal and external sensory and cognitive information to the cortex51,62. Thalamic gating is under the control of glutamatergic cortico-striatal and cortico-thalamic pathways that project to specific and non-specific nuclei of the thalamus and is also under the modulatory influence of serotonergic and dopaminergic neurons in the raphe and ventral tegmentum, which project to several components of the CSTC loops63. Hence, the CSTC model proposes that psychedelics disrupt thalamic gating by stimulating 5-HT2Areceptors located in several parts of the CSTC loop, resulting in a feedforward information overload of the cortex and subsequent disruption of cortico-cortical integration of distributed neuronal activity51,62(Fig.
1). It is suggested that this may eventually cause the increased sensory perception, cognitive disturbances and ego dissolution that occur in psychedelic states51,62. This hypothesis is also compatible with the suggested increase of sensory bottom-up information flow and relaxedpriorsformulated in the REBUS64model described below.
The CSTC model is supported by evidence that infusion of DOI into the ventral pallidum in rodents65and systemic administration of psilocybin, LSD and DMT in humans disrupts sensorimotor gating and is associated with alterations in cognitive functioning in a 5-HT2A-dependent manner66,67,68,69. Two neuroimaging studies have provided further support for this model by demonstrating increased thalamic functional connectivity after the administration of LSD, particularly between the thalamus and the sensory and sensory somato-motor cortical regions31,70. In another study, dynamic causal modelling was used to assess effective connectivity between major hubs of the CSTC model71. Increased excitatory connectivity from the thalamus to the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), consistent with the predicted increase in thalamo-cortical information flow, was demonstrated under LSD. In line with another prediction of the model, decreased control of the ventral striatum over the thalamus was detected. However, LSD also decreased the effective connectivity from the thalamus to the temporal cortex. These results together suggest that whereas LSD indeed increases ‘bottom-up’ thalamo-cortical information flow to certain cortical regions, it reduces information flow to others. Hence, psychedelics such as LSD, at least at the moderate doses tested, appear not to induce undifferentiated cortical flooding as originally hypothesized71.
Consistent with the idea that psychedelics disrupt thalamic gating, two earlier human positron emission tomography studies reported that psilocybin markedly increased cerebral glucose metabolism in PFC regions (a phenomenon termed ‘hyperfrontality’) and, to a lesser extent, in adjacent cortical regions72,73. After normalizing to the global metabolic rate of glucose, a pattern emerged of hypermetabolism in prefrontal and tempomedial areas and hypometabolism in subcortical and occipital brain regions74. Similar hyperfrontality effects were shown after oral administration of DMT or mescaline in studies that measured cerebral blood flow (CBF) via single-photon emission tomography75,76. More recently, two studies investigated CBF after the administration of psilocybin and LSD usingarterial spin labelling77,78,79, revealing increases in CBF in the visual cortex under LSD79and brain-wide decreases in CBF after psilocybin administration78. The latter result was corroborated in a third study that used two different doses of psilocybin77. However, after additionally controlling for unspecific global effects (see Box2), a divergent pattern with increases in CBF in frontal regions and decreases in subcortical and occipital regions was evident77. These results support the hypothesis that reduced thalamic gating leads to overactivity of prefrontal brain regions.
It is important to note that alterations in thalamo-cortical connectivity may not be a specific signature of the psychedelic state, as changes in the functional organization of these loops have also been reported in psychotic disorders such as schizophrenia80. However, they may represent an important component of the response to these compounds that, together with changes in the functional architecture of the cortex (discussed below), gives rise to psychedelic experiences. Whether the characteristic features of psychedelic states (such as ego dissolution) are due to a disruption of more specific thalamo-cortical projections and cortico-cortical interactions needs to be further investigated. Animal studies were able to show selective modulation of thalamic gating by attention during wakefulness81. The use of such animal models may therefore represent a promising scientific approach to shed further light on the role of thalamic gating in psychedelic states.
Box 2 Psychedelic-induced global effects on neuroimaging dataAcross different imaging modalities, such as positron emission tomography, arterial spin labelling (ASL) and functional MRI, psychedelics have repeatedly been shown to induce unspecific global effects on resting-state data15,31,72,77,86,87,89. The global signal in functional MRI data is thought to represent a complex mixture of non-neural artefacts, such as head motion, cardiac and respiratory changes, changes in blood pressure and vasomotion174, and additionally includes fluctuations in neuronal activity175. One approach to control for these unspecific effects is the use of global signal regression (GSR), in which the mean is computed across grey matter voxels and regressed from each voxel’s time course. However, the utilization of GSR is still a matter of debate with advantages and disadvantages175. Not removing the global signal and related artefacts can induce spuriously high correlations across brain regions175,176. On the other hand, GSR may also remove interesting neuronal effects and has been reported to induce anti-correlations in modelling studies175. A detailed description of the advantages and disadvantages of GSR is presented in ref.
175. The current consensus is that neuroimaging analyses should be repeated with and without GSR, to provide complementary insights into changes in the brain’s functional architecture175.
Although GSR has been shown to have negligible to small effects on the results obtained with certain analytic approaches, such as dynamic causal modelling177, two studies have reported that the use or non-use of GSR has an impact on functional global brain connectivity measures obtained after the administration of psychedelics31,87. Global brain connectivity has been shown to produce replicable results in two different samples in which GSR was used31,87, whereas the pattern of results across studies without GSR has been inconsistent to date31,70,87,90. To further improve the consistency of results, future studies should therefore pay attention to this preprocessing step and report results with and without GSR.
With regard to ASL data, global signal fluctuations have similarly been associated with temporal magnetic resonance signal variations, thermal noise or physiological variations178. These signals can vary across different scan sessions or subjects and are therefore insufficiently removed with regular filtering procedures. Using repeated ASL scans, it has been shown that controlling for the global signal resulted in better cerebral blood flow quantifications with a higher temporal signal to noise ratio, better test–retest stability and better cerebral blood flow map quality178. Controlling for the global signal is a routine procedure in ASL studies, and for most pharmacological ASL studies it is common practice to report analyses both with and without the global covariate179,180. Psilocybin has been shown to induce global changes in the ASL signal. Complementary to those results, additional insights have been reported after these changes have been controlled for77. This provides further support for the suggestion that future studies assessing the effect of psychedelics on cerebral blood flow continue to report results with and without controlling for global signal changes.
Evidence for alterations in network integrationIn recent years, various neuroimaging studies have investigated the impact of psychedelics on the network dynamics of the human brain31,78,79,82,83,84,85,86. Most studies used functional connectivity approaches to investigate changes in between-network and within-network connectivity.
Using functional global brain connectivity, a data-driven approach that measures the connectivity between each voxel and the rest of the brain, a concurrent increase in the integration of sensory and somato-motor brain networks and disintegration of networks of associative brain regions was reported after LSD31and psilocybin87administration. The pattern of brain regions affected by these functional connectivity changes correlated with those expressing theHTR2Agene in maps derived from the Allen Human Brain Atlas DNA microarrays31(which are highly consistent with positron emission tomography imaging data for the 5-HT2Areceptor88), pinpointing the crucial role of this receptor also in systems-level changes induced by psychedelics. These results are in line with a recent study showing decreased expression (that is, a decreased probability of the occurrence of a recurrent phase-locking pattern in theblood oxygen level-dependent signalover time) of the frontoparietal control network, which overlaps with associative brain regions mentioned above, together with an increased occurrence of a globally coherent brain state under the influence of psilocybin89. Thus, it is conceivable that increased processing of sensory information that is not counterbalanced by associative network integrity may underlie or contribute to the multifaceted phenomenology of psychedelic states. Figure2presents an integration of these results with the reported changes in thalamic gating discussed above. However, it is important to note that Fig.
2is not a comprehensive summary of all neuroimaging results obtained under the influence of psychedelics but, rather, represents a working hypothesis of the mechanisms that potentially underlie the psychedelic state and that should be tested in future studies. Two additional studies have investigated global brain connectivity after the administration of LSD and reported evidence for increased thalamic functional connectivity. However, with the exception of this finding, these studies — which, unlike the studies mentioned above, did not use global signal regression (GSR)70,90— did not show overlapping results91. For a detailed discussion of psychedelic-induced global effects on neuroimaging data and the advantages and disadvantages of GSR, see Box2.
One model for the mechanism of action of psychedelics suggests that they exert their effects via the cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical loops that control thalamic gating of internal and external sensory and cognitive information to the cortex51. Consistent with this idea, it has been shown that these psychedelics disrupt pre-attentive sensorimotor gating in humans66,67,68,69,84. Furthermore, evidence from some human neuroimaging studies shows that psychedelics increase functional connectivity between the thalamus and sensory cortical regions31,70and decrease thalamic functional connectivity with association areas31. Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) has also been shown to increase effective connectivity from the thalamus to the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) and the ventral striatum71. These findings support a reduction of thalamic filtering of interoceptive and exteroceptive information and increased information flow to particular areas of the cortex, and are also compatible with the hypothesis of sensory bottom-up overflow and relaxed priors as described in the REBUS model64. At the same time, increased synchronization of sensory cortical regions31,87,154and decreased integration of association regions has repeatedly been reported31,78,79,83,86,87,89,96. Therefore, as illustrated in the schematic, a reduction of thalamic filtering may lead to an increase in sensory processing that is not counterbalanced by integrative processing in association cortices. This dysbalance may be experienced as psychedelic symptoms31,87,153. This figure is not a comprehensive summary of neuroimaging results obtained under the influence of psychedelics (see main text for more details) but, rather, represents a working hypothesis of potential mechanisms underlying the psychedelic state that needs to be tested in future studies.
In addition to these changes, several studies have demonstrated alterations in functional connectivity between nodes of differentintrinsic brain networksafter the administration of psychedelics; however, the results reported have often been inconsistent91. Resting-state fMRI studies in regular waking states have identified two orthogonal (anticorrelated) networks: thedefault mode network(DMN) and the task positive network92. This anti-correlation is suggested to support the transition between internally directed thoughts and the external environment92. Although psilocybin decreased DMN–task positive network orthogonality84, this result was not replicated after administration of the DMT-containing drink ayahuasca, regardless of preprocessing with or without GSR86. More widespread changes in between-network connectivity have also been reported after psilocybin85and LSD79,83administration; however, again, results have not yet revealed a congruent pattern91. The lack of consistency may be because most of the results are based on relatively small sample sizes (<20 participants), a potential limitation calling for larger studies and comparable methodological approaches93,94,95.
The most consistent finding in all of the various studies that have investigated functional connectivity within the nodes of intrinsic brain networks has been reduced functional connectivity in or between structures of the DMN31,78,79,83,86,96. However, similar decreases in functional connectivity between the nodes of the DMN have been reported after the administration ofselective serotonin reuptake inhibitors97and may therefore represent unspecific serotonergic effects91. The specific contribution of decreased DMN integrity to psychedelic effects should therefore be investigated in future studies.
Evidence for altered entropyThe neuromodulatory effects of 5-HT2Areceptors and their effects on synaptic efficacy can also be observed as changes in fast electrophysiological dynamics that result from specific alterations in neuronal excitability or postsynaptic gain in cortical microcircuits. Functionally, these changes can be expected to influence the precision of neuronal message transfer, especially in the context ofpredictive processingor hierarchical Bayesian formulations of perception98. In line with this, increasedentropyhas been suggested to be a neural signature of psychedelics. This has been formulated as the “entropic brain hypothesis”99,100and has recently been integrated together with the “free-energy principle” to produce the “relaxed beliefs under psychedelics (REBUS) and the anarchic brain” model64. In brief, this model states that psychedelics reduce the precision of high-level priors (expectations or beliefs about the world) and concurrently increase bottom-up information flow. This renders recurrent message transfer more sensitive to modulation by ascending afferents, thereby increasing the entropy and complexity of accompanying neuronal dynamics64. Empirical evidence that psychedelics such as LSD, psilocybin and DMT (but also the dissociative drug ketamine) increase the Lempel–Ziv complexity (a measure of signal diversity that quantifies the number of distinct patterns present in the data and an approximation to entropy) ofmagnetoencephalographyandelectroencephalographysignals has been reported101,102. In an fMRI study, increased sample entropy (a measure indicating the complexity of a signal by representing the predictability of the signal over time) was also observed in sensory and some higher-order networks after the administration of LSD103. Furthermore, an increased repertoire of different brain states (rapid changes in brain dynamics and functional connectivity) was reported after psilocybin and LSD administration in the same set of healthy individuals104,105. Increased Shannon entropy, broadly defined as the amount of information in a variable, was also reported in seven participants after the ingestion of ayahuasca106.
As noted above, the REBUS model hypothesizes that psychedelic-induced increased entropy reflects a relaxation of the precision weighting of priors, leading to decreased top-down and increased bottom-up information flow. Corroborating this model, reduced electrophysiological responses to the presentation of surprising stimuli have been found under the influence of LSD107, as well as reduced top-down and increased bottom-up connectivity between different brain areas such as the thalamus and the PCC as described above71. However, other studies have not observed reductions in surprise responses108,109. This model therefore needs further testing to establish its specificity and generalizability. Future research should consider leveraging the advantages of technologies allowing the co-registration of electroencephalography recordings and transcranial magnetic stimulation to gain further causal insight into psychedelic-induced changes in connectivity and complexity.
Functional alterationsNumerous recent studies have investigated the impact of psychedelics on specific cognitive and emotional functions. Most studies were conducted while participants were engaged in specific tasks and under the acute influence of the substance. These studies have revealed psychedelic-induced alterations in emotional processing, self-processing and social processing that may have relevance for psychedelic-assisted therapy (summarized in Fig.
3) as well as perceptual changes and alterations in symbolic imagery.
Schematic shows changes in emotional processing, self-processing and social processing that have been measured acutely in controlled trials after the administration of psychedelics11,12,20,120,138. These acute effects may contribute to the potential therapeutic effects of these substances.
Altered emotional processingDuring the 1950s and 1960s, psychedelics were used as adjuncts to psychotherapy to facilitate the release of emotion and ease emotionally loaded memory blocks110. More recent studies in healthy volunteers as well as patients with different psychiatric disorders have confirmed that psilocybin and LSD increase both positive and negative mood, emotional excitation and sensitivity, and can lead to emotional breakthroughs (that is, the overcoming of challenging emotions or memories and thereby the experience of emotional release) in a supportive clinical setting11,68,111,112. Furthermore, psilocybin has been shown to augment subjective and neural responses to positive autobiographical memory cues in healthy participants113.
Investigating the processing of emotions, various studies have shown that psychedelics can reduce the response to negative emotional stimuli in a controlled research setting. For example, LSD and psilocybin dose-dependently decreased the recognition of negative facial expressions in healthy participants114,115,116. In line with this, psilocybin reduced the subjective discrimination between fearful and neutral faces and the encoding of fearful faces117. In another study, the reduced processing of fearful faces was associated with decreased activity within limbic brain areas, whereas there was a reduction of activity in response to happy faces within limbic and right temporo-occipital brain areas118. Furthermore, psilocybin and LSD induced reduced neural responses to negative stimuli in the amygdala119,120, an effect that correlated with an increase in positive mood120. Connectivity analyses showed that psilocybin reduced top-down directed connectivity from the amygdala to the primary visual cortex during threat processing121and decreased functional connectivity between the amygdala and the striatum during angry face discrimination122. Additionally, changes in positive mood after a low dose (microdose) of LSD have been shown to correlate with increased resting-state functional connectivity between the amygdala and the frontal cortex123. It is possible that a global reduction in concentration could influence the results of these studies testing the effects of psychedelics on specific cognitive or emotional tasks. That being said, all of the studies mentioned above controlled carefully for differences in performance and none of them revealed global impairments114,115,119,120. We therefore believe it is unlikely that the reduced processing of negative stimuli under the influence of psychedelics can be attributed to decreased attentional or cognitive capacities.
A negative cognitive and emotional bias is a core symptom of major depression disorder46. Hence, the findings above make it conceivable that classic psychedelics enhance positive mood in individuals with major depression disorder by acting as a modulator of the major connectivity hubs of the amygdala, therefore acutely reducing the processing of negative emotions. This, in turn, may allow patients with depression to inspect emotionally loaded self-relevant thoughts and memories from a less judgemental and decentred stance4.
An important, yet scarcely addressed, question is whether psychedelics produce a sustained beneficial effect on emotional processing. In healthy participants, reduced amygdala reactivity in response to emotional stimuli has been reported 1 week after psilocybin administration, but returned to baseline 1 month after administration124. Similarly, negative affect was decreased 1 week after administration and returned to pre-administration levels after 1 month124. In individuals with treatment-resistant depression, emotion recognition showed continued improvement 1 month after treatment with psilocybin125. These results provide the first evidence that psychedelics may have a continued positive effect on emotion processing and mood that may normalize the negative bias observed in major depression. In contrast to these acute and sustained effects of psychedelics, one study reported increased amygdala reactivity in response to fearful faces in individuals with depression the morning after psilocybin administration126. The same group showed a reduction in amygdala–PFC connectivity127. One potential explanation for these findings is that acute, psilocybin-induced, facilitated processing of negative experiences may lead to increased reactivity and emotional processing post acutely. It is important to note that the increased amygdala reactivity in individuals with depression was measured prior to psychological integration work126. This may indicate that a therapeutic integration of the experience is necessary to achieve long-term reductions in the processing of negative emotions. Thus, the long-term effects of psilocybin on amygdala reactivity, their clinical relevance and the impact of post-acute psychotherapeutic interventions need to be determined in future studies. Additionally, further studies are warranted to evaluate whether specific emotion processing tasks may be useful to predict clinical efficacy of psychedelics in patients with different psychiatric disorders.
Altered self-processingPsychedelics can have a profound impact on various aspects of the experienced sense of self128. This is often described as a loosening of self-boundaries, oneness, unity or ego dissolution under the acute influence of the substance111. Experimentally, several studies have aimed at capturing these phenomena. During a social interaction task in human volunteers, LSD was found to reduce the differentiation between self and others via decreased differential activation in the cortical midline structures12, which have repeatedly been shown to be involved in generating a model of the self129. Additionally, in another study, the administration of LSD led to increased perception of self-relevance as well as of meaningfulness of external stimuli11.
By correlating psychometrically assessed subjective alterations in self-experience with brain imaging data, recent studies have attempted to identify the neural correlates of ego dissolution. So far, different results have been obtained with different methods. LSD-induced alterations in self-processing were correlated with altered global brain connectivity in the somato-motor network31, as well as in the angular gyrus and the insula in a different study90. In a separate study that used the same data set as ref.
90, LSD-induced subjective ego dissolution correlated with decreased seed-based functional connectivity between the parahippocampus and retrosplenial cortex and within the DMN assessed with fMRI79and with decreased delta and alpha power assessed with magnetoencephalography79(potentially associated with increased excitability of brain networks130). In another study, psilocybin-induced self-reported ego disintegration correlated with decreased alpha power in the PCC96and — in the same participants — with decreased functional connectivity between the medial temporal lobe and high-level cortical regions, a ‘disintegration’ of the salience network and reduced interhemispheric communication131. These disparate findings suggest that a single neural correlate of ego dissolution may not exist. However, the various aspects of altered self-experience — in particular, pleasurable versus anxious ego dissolution — have not been clearly distinguished in current studies. A more distinct definition and operationalization of altered self-experiences is needed to be able to conclusively identify their specific neural correlates.
In addition to the advantages of gaining an integral understanding of the neural basis of the self, these studies are important because alterations in self-processing are considered to be central to the efficacy of psychedelic-assisted therapy4,128,132. So far, positively experienced self-dissolution associated with feelings of oneness (often referred to as mystical-type experiences) has been shown to be positively correlated with treatment success in addiction, depression and anxiety in palliative care133,134,135,136and in major depression137. It is also conceivable that ego dissolution and reduced self-focus lead to a ‘decentring’, that is, a state allowing a broader spectrum of thought patterns and emotions, which may be beneficial especially in individuals with depression who suffer from ruminative thinking. Furthermore, alterations in self-processing have been linked to changes in social cognition — in particular, increased empathy and reduced rejection sensitivity12,20,138. Alterations in self-processing may therefore promote changes in social cognition that have been reported to be critical to therapeutic efficacy (see below).
Altered social processingLSD and psilocybin have been shown to acutely modulate social processing in healthy participants12,20,114,138. This is of particular interest given the impact of impaired social cognition in psychiatric disorders and the insufficiency of currently available medication to treat these deficits139,140. Most importantly for therapeutic application, both LSD and psilocybin increase emotional empathy (that is, the capacity to feel ‘with’ other people), although they have no effect on cognitive empathy (that is, the ability to take another person’s perspective and the understanding of another person’s mental state)114,138. Furthermore, psilocybin has been shown to reduce the feeling of social exclusion and social rejection processing in the anterior cingulate cortex20. These effects may reduce social withdrawal behaviour and improve the patient–therapist relationship during psychedelic-assisted treatment4.
The long-term effects of psychedelics on social processing have currently scarcely been investigated. Self-reported increases in interpersonal closeness were described up to 14 months after one or two administrations of psilocybin141,142,143,144. Self-reported increases in positive and/or altruistic social effects were also reported 4 and 12 months after the administration of psilocybin and LSD in healthy participants145,146. Furthermore, self-reported increases in prosocial behaviour 4 months after psilocybin administration correlated with changes in medial PFC–PCC connectivity 2 days after psilocybin146,147. Emotional empathy has also been reported to be increased the morning after a psilocybin retreat and to endure up to 7 days for negative emotions148.
In clinical studies with psilocybin (Box3), individuals with various psychiatric conditions identified social factors as contributing to their disease and reported improvements after psilocybin-assisted therapy. For example, participants in one study designed to promote smoking cessation reported psilocybin-induced feelings of love and of being reconnected with their environment and other people as important for quitting smoking149. In addition, they reported increased engagement in prosocial and altruistic activities after psilocybin administration149. This suggests that psilocybin-assisted therapy may reinstate social reward processing, helping people to overcome their addiction. In a study of individuals with depression, participants reported distressing feelings of being disconnected before psilocybin-assisted therapy150. After psilocybin treatment, they felt reconnected with their social environment and identified this increased connection as one of the main changes induced by the treatment150. Taken together, these findings suggest that the beneficial impact of psychedelics on social cognition and behaviour may be an important mechanism contributing to clinical efficacy.
Box 3 Psychedelics in the treatment of psychiatric disordersSince 2010, clinical research that examines the effects of psilocybin, lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) and the plant-derived ayahuasca beverage (containing the psychedelicN,N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT) and the monoamine oxidase inhibitor harmaline) in the treatment of mood disorders and addiction has resurged181. Recent psychedelic-assisted therapy studies include three steps: a few intensive preparation sessions; one or two supervised drug sessions in which a medium or high dose of a psychedelic is administered in a supportive environment; and several post-drug integration sessions for the psychedelic experience. Based on the idea that psychedelics may facilitate the psychotherapeutic process, some clinicians combine this basic approach with evidence-based psychotherapy.
Two open-label trials using this approach showed that psilocybin, in conjunction with motivational enhancement therapy or cognitive behavioural therapy, reduced alcohol consumption in individuals suffering from addiction for up to 53 weeks and nicotine abuse for up to 6 months, outcomes that were linked to the intensity of the mystical-type experiences that the subjects reported135,182. Two additional open-label studies showed that a single dose of ayahuasca in individuals with recurrent major depression produced significant reductions in depressive symptoms, with a rapid onset and effects lasting up to the 3-week end point183,184. Neuroimaging revealed acute increases in cerebral blood flow in the left nucleus accumbens, right insula and left subgenual area, which might be relevant for the change in mood, after ayahuasca intake184. In another open-label trial, individuals with treatment-resistant major depression received two doses of psilocybin at a weekly interval with psychological support185. Significant improvements in self-rated depressive symptoms were observed up to 6 months, with a maximum at 5 weeks186. The reduction of depressive symptoms at 5 weeks was predicted by high scores of acutely experienced pleasurable self-dissolution and by low scores for dread of ego dissolution137, supporting the hypothesis that the quality of the psychedelic experience is key for the positive long-term outcome4. The improvement at week 5 also correlated with the sum score for feelings of unity, bliss and spirituality. One day after psilocybin treatment, neuroimaging revealed that decreased amygdala cerebral blood flow and decreased parahippocampal–medial prefrontal cortex functional connectivity, as well as increased prefrontal cortex–bilateral inferior lateral parietal cortex resting-state functional connectivity, correlated with the reduction in depressive symptoms187. In contrast to previous studies reporting decreases in resting-state functional connectivity within the default mode network with psilocybin, LSD and DMT administration in healthy subjects31,78,79,83,86,96, psilocybin increased default mode network resting-state functional connectivity in the patients 1 day post treatment187. This finding is somewhat surprising, given that increased resting-state functional connectivity within the default mode network has been repeatedly reported in depression, and associated with rumination188. Thus, longitudinal placebo-controlled studies are warranted to further elucidate the temporal dynamics of these changes in functional connectivity and their relation to depressive symptoms.
Five double-blind, placebo-controlled studies have also been conducted to investigate the effects of psychedelics in the treatment of depressive symptoms and/or anxiety134,136,189,190,191. Three of these studies used psilocybin and reported significant reductions in depression and anxiety in patients with advanced cancer134,136,189. The symptom improvement was correlated with the extent of the acute mystical-type experience reported by the patients134,136. Likewise, in another double-blind trial, two doses of LSD or placebo-like doses of LSD (20 µg) were given to patients with life-threatening diseases and anxiety. In combination with psychotherapy, this treatment was found to reduce state anxiety at 2-month follow up, enduring to the 12-month follow up191,192. In another double-blind study, a single dose of ayahuasca was reported to reduce depressive symptoms in treatment-resistant major depressive disorder190.
Altered sensory processingPerceptual changes are the most frequent and robust features of the psychedelic experience. Psychedelics, also called hallucinogens, have been claimed to produce a dream-like state characterized by alterations in visual processing, but have also been shown to impact auditory and tactile perception to a lesser degree111. At moderate doses, alterations in visual percepts rarely represent true hallucinations but, rather, illusions or pseudo-hallucinations that can be distinguished from real perceptions. A psilocybin, LSD and DMT-induced decrease inalpha oscillations— in particular, over posterior parieto-occipital brain areas – suggests that psychedelics increase the excitability of the visual pathway21,102,130,151,152. The amplification of internal-driven excitation may therefore underlie the visual alterations experienced in the absence of external input153. This is also in line with resting-state neuroimaging results obtained after LSD administration showing that connectivity within the visual cortex reflects the intrinsic retinotopic architecture, suggesting that activity within the visual cortex becomes more dependent on its intrinsic organization154. Furthermore, increased resting-state connectivity between the thalamus and the fusiform gyrus was shown to correlate with visual alterations under LSD administration70. During mental imagery, the blood oxygen level-dependent signal amplitude in the primary visual cortex after ayahuasca intake was reported to be comparable to natural image viewing155. In response to external stimuli, psilocybin increased the P1 component (the first positive component of an event-related potential observed around 100 ms after stimulus presentation and thought to reflect early visual information processing) in visual area V1 and concurrently decreased the visual N170 evoked potential (a negative event-related potential occurring 130–200 ms after visual stimulus presentation and thought to reflect altered global integration) in the lateral occipital complex156. This suggests that a dysbalance between perception and integration may explain psilocybin-induced illusions and hallucinations153, and is in line with results obtained in resting-state connectivity studies described above (Fig.
2).
For other modalities, only slight perceptual changes have so far been recorded. A reduction in the N1 sensory evoked potential (the first negative component of an event-related potential observed around 150–200 ms after stimulus presentation) in an auditory paradigm was reported after psilocybin administration, suggesting reduced processing of the intensity of auditory stimuli108. Alterations in tactile perception are often associated with changes in self-experience and body experience111. Usually, alterations in these domains are experienced assynaesthesia, with mostly auditory stimuli being translated to the visual domain157. Under the influence of LSD, music-evoked visual imagery has been related to increased effective connectivity from the parahippocampal cortex to the visual cortex, suggesting that an increase in top-down information on early sensory regions may contribute to psychedelic-induced changes in perception158.
The therapeutic relevance of alterations in sensory processing is currently not well understood. However, the content of psychedelic-induced mental imagery is often based on autobiographic memories14and the activation of related emotions14,113. Such subjective experiences of vivid imagery strongly resemble naturally occurring dreaming during the sleep–wake cycle and may have long-term beneficial effects on psychosocial functioning and well-being14.
Implications for health and diseasePharmacological challenge studieswith psychedelics not only elucidate their potential clinical effects but also offer the unique opportunity to investigate the role of the 5-HT receptor system in human perception, cognition and emotion11, particularly when psychedelics are investigated in combination with specific 5-HT receptor antagonists. Psychedelics provide a significant advantage over other tools used to study the serotonin system, such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors or tryptophan depletion, which cannot reveal receptor-specific contributions.
The studies summarized above show that the 5-HT2Areceptor system is critically implicated in emotional, social and self-processing. Blocking the 5-HT2Areceptor with ketanserin before administering LSD showed that this receptor system is involved in the generation of self-relevance11. Whereas individuals with schizophrenia spectrum disorders often experience an increased attribution of relevance to their environment159, those suffering from addiction or depression could benefit from changes in self-relevance attribution160. This suggests that treatment with 5-HT2Aagonists may be effective in depression and addiction but not in schizophrenia spectrum disorders.
LSD also alters self-processing and social cognition12. These effects were also blocked with ketanserin, suggesting that aberrant 5-HT2Areceptor-mediated signalling underlies these interdependent changes in self-perception and social processing. This association between self-perception and social perception suggests that individuals who suffer from incoherent self-experience and social withdrawal (as often encountered in schizophrenia) may benefit from treatment with 5-HT2Areceptor antagonists. By contrast, 5-HT2Areceptor agonists may be well suited to treat social deficits in individuals with increased self-focus, such as depression161. This is also in line with results suggesting that stimulating the 5-HT2Areceptor results in a decreased processing of negative emotions114,115,116, an effect that may be helpful in the treatment of depression46. Furthermore, it has been shown that this effect translates to a reduced processing of negative social interaction in the anterior cingulate cortex20. This was associated with decreased aspartate concentrations in the same brain area. The 5-HT2Areceptor system and the aspartate system may therefore be implicated in the pathophysiology and treatment of disorders characterized by increased rejection sensitivity, such as depression and borderline personality disorders162. In sum, these results implicate the 5-HT2Areceptor system in various trans-diagnostic cognitive and emotional processes important for the treatment of depression, addiction and borderline personality disorder, and therefore provide rational targets for the development of novel medication.
ConclusionsScientific interest in the effects of psychedelics has risen sharply in the past decade. Preclinical and clinical studies leveraging modern neuroscientific methods have produced various novel results with significant implications for understanding the neuropharmacology of human cognition, emotion and self-regulation, discovering potential trans-diagnostic treatment mechanisms in psychiatry and the development of novel rapid-acting and long-lasting treatment approaches.
Pharmacological challenge studies investigating the acute effects of single doses of psychedelics in healthy human participants have revealed important insights into the role of the 5-HT2Areceptor in human cognition, emotion and self-regulation. These studies have shown that this specific receptor system is implicated in modulating social functioning, mood regulation and coherent self-representations. Importantly, these studies have also revealed the importance of targeting and studying specific sub-receptor systems to be able to conclusively understand human psychopharmacology and eventually be able to inform the development of new pharmacological therapeutics.
Recent neuroimaging studies have furthermore started to increase our understanding of the ways in which psychedelics temporarily change the functional architecture of the brain. Although different analytical approaches often limit the comparability between studies (see Box2), some congruent patterns have started to emerge. Changes in functional and directed connectivity between the thalamus and cortical areas have been reported across different analysis techniques31,70,71. In addition, increased synchrony of sensory brain regions and decreased integrity of associative brain regions (including the DMN and the frontoparietal control network) have been reported after the administration of LSD, psilocybin and DMT31,78,79,83,86,87,89,96,153. However, it has to be noted that some of these effects are sensitive to GSR as outlined in Box2. Increases in various measures of entropy and signal complexity have also been reported after the administration of LSD, psilocybin and DMT101,102,104,105,106. Other analytical approaches, such as the investigation of between-network connectivity during the resting state, have so far revealed inconsistent results or still need replication. These results support hypotheses that are not mutually exclusive but, rather, reflect different aspects of changes in neuronal dynamics. It is conceivable that future studies will reveal a more detailed (in terms of both spatial and temporal resolution) pattern of psychedelic-induced changes in brain connectivity that will allow one to better associate these neuronal effects with specific psychedelic-induced subjective experiences.
Studies of the effects of psychedelics in healthy participants have shown that these substances modulate a person’s self-focus, reduce negative emotional processing and strengthen social functioning12,120,138. Patients across different disorders who underwent treatment with psychedelics identified these effects as contributing to treatment success149,150. These experiences may therefore represent trans-diagnostic mechanisms for the treatment of psychiatric illnesses within and beyond the framework of psychedelic-assisted therapy. Additionally, preclinical results point to the potential of induced neuroplasticity as a promising neuronal mechanism that could be leveraged in psychotherapy54.
Lastly, studies in patient populations show that psychedelics may constitute promising therapeutic agents that represent a novel treatment model in psychiatry: they have been shown to act rapidly and to have long-lasting effects after only a few doses. This is in stark contrast to the current treatment approaches in psychiatry, which usually consist of a regular intake of psychotropic medication. However, many open questions remain. The exact mechanisms underlying the therapeutic effects are still not well understood and beneficial clinical results need to be replicated in larger trials. It is unclear whether the therapeutic effects of these substances are due to their direct effects on brain activity and connectivity or due to the cognitive and psychological experience of an altered state of consciousness. In other words, it is unclear whether the conscious experience of the psychedelic-induced subjective effects is necessary for therapeutic efficacy. Furthermore, the field still needs to uncover individual predictors or biomarkers of treatment efficacy. The impact of different approaches to accompanying psychotherapy will also require empirical investigation. Accompanying psychotherapy may turn out to be of critical importance, if the proposed neuroplastic effects of psychedelics indeed contribute to their clinical efficacy. Using psychedelics in a clinical setting can therefore be understood as pharmacologically assisted psychotherapy that leverages the molecular, systems-level and functional alterations induced by psychedelic substances.
ReferencesGrinspoon, L. & Bakalar, J. B.
Psychedelic Drugs Reconsidered(Basic Books, 1979).
Mascher, E. inNeuro-Psychopharmacology(ed. Brill, H.) 441–444 (Excerpta-Medica, 1967).
Rucker, J. J., Jelen, L. A., Flynn, S., Frowde, K. D. & Young, A. H. Psychedelics in the treatment of unipolar mood disorders: a systematic review.
J. Psychopharmacol.
30, 1220–1229 (2016).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarLeuner, H. in50 Years of LSD: Current Status and Perspectives of Hallucinogens: a Symposium of the Swiss Academy of Medical Sciences(eds Pletscher, A. & Ladewig, D.) 175–189 (Parthenon Publisher Group Ltd, 1994).
Krebs, T. S. & Johansen, P. O. Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) for alcoholism: meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
J. Psychopharmacol.
26, 994–1002 (2012).
PubMedGoogle ScholarPletscher, A. & Ladewig, D.
50 Years of LSD: Current Status and Perspectives of Hallucinogens: A Symposium of the Swiss Academy of Medical Sciences(Parthenon Publisher Group Ltd, 1994).
Vollenweider, F. X. & Kometer, M. The neurobiology of psychedelic drugs: implications for the treatment of mood disorders.
Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
11, 642–651 (2010).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarNichols, D. E. Hallucinogens.
Pharmacol. Ther.
101, 131–181 (2004).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarHalberstadt, A. L. Recent advances in the neuropsychopharmacology of serotonergic hallucinogens.
Behav. Brain Res.
277, 99–120 (2015).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarHalberstadt, A. L., Chatha, M., Klein, A. K., Wallach, J. & Brandt, S. D. Correlation between the potency of hallucinogens in the mouse head-twitch response assay and their behavioral and subjective effects in other species.
Neuropharmacology167, 107933 (2020).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarPreller, K. H. et al. The fabric of meaning and subjective effects in LSD-induced states depend on serotonin 2A receptor activation.
Curr. Biol.
27, 451–457 (2017).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarPreller, K. H. et al. Role of the 5-HT2Areceptor in self- and other-initiated social interaction in lysergic acid diethylamide-induced states: a pharmacological fMRI study.
J. Neurosci.
38, 3603–3611 (2018).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarKraehenmann, R. et al. LSD increases primary process thinking via serotonin 2A receptor activation.
Front. Pharmacol.
8, 814 (2017).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarKraehenmann, R. et al. Dreamlike effects of LSD on waking imagery in humans depend on serotonin 2A receptor activation.
Psychopharmacology234, 2031–2046 (2017).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarVollenweider, F. X., Vollenweider-Scherpenhuyzen, M. F., Babler, A., Vogel, H. & Hell, D. Psilocybin induces schizophrenia-like psychosis in humans via a serotonin-2 agonist action.
Neuroreport9, 3897–3902 (1998).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarWinter, J. C., Rice, K. C., Amorosi, D. J. & Rabin, R. A. Psilocybin-induced stimulus control in the rat.
Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav.
87, 472–480 (2007).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarBenneyworth, M. A., Smith, R. L., Barrett, R. J. & Sanders-Bush, E. Complex discriminative stimulus properties of (+)lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) in C57Bl/6J mice.
Psychopharmacology179, 854–862 (2005).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarLeysen, J. E. inNeuromethods(eds Boulton, A. A., Baker, G. B. & Butterworth, R.) 299–350 (Springer, 1989).
Titeler, M., Lyon, R. A. & Glennon, R. A. Radioligand binding evidence implicates the brain 5-HT2 receptor as a site of action for LSD and phenylisopropylamine hallucinogens.
Psychopharmacology94, 213–216 (1988).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarPreller, K. H. et al. Effects of serotonin 2A/1A receptor stimulation on social exclusion processing.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA113, 5119–5124 (2016).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarValle, M. et al. Inhibition of alpha oscillations through serotonin-2A receptor activation underlies the visual effects of ayahuasca in humans.
Eur. Neuropsychopharm26, 1161–1175 (2016).
CASGoogle ScholarQuednow, B., Geyer, M. A. & Halberstadt, A. L. inHandbook of Behavioral Neurobiology of Serotonin(eds Müller, C. P. & Cunningham, K. A.) 585–619 (Elsevier, 2010).
Madsen, M. K. et al. Psychedelic effects of psilocybin correlate with serotonin 2A receptor occupancy and plasma psilocin levels.
Neuropsychopharmacology44, 1328–1334 (2019).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarPokorny, T., Preller, K. H., Kraehenmann, R. & Vollenweider, F. X. Modulatory effect of the 5-HT1Aagonist buspirone and the mixed non-hallucinogenic 5-HT1A/2Aagonist ergotamine on psilocybin-induced psychedelic experience.
Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol.
26, 756–766 (2016).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarCarter, O. L. et al. Modulating the rate and rhythmicity of perceptual rivalry alternations with the mixed 5-HT2Aand 5-HT1Aagonist psilocybin.
Neuropsychopharmacology30, 1154–1162 (2005).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarGonzalez-Maeso, J. et al. Hallucinogens recruit specific cortical 5-HT2Areceptor-mediated signaling pathways to affect behavior.
Neuron53, 439–452 (2007).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarGonzalez-Maeso, J. et al. Identification of a serotonin/glutamate receptor complex implicated in psychosis.
Nature452, 93–97 (2008).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarVollenweider, F. X., Vontobel, P., Hell, D. & Leenders, K. L. 5-HT modulation of dopamine release in basal ganglia in psilocybin-induced psychosis in man — a PET study with [C-11]raclopride.
Neuropsychopharmacology20, 424–433 (1999).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarIchikawa, J. & Meltzer, H. Y. The effect of serotonin(1A) receptor agonism on antipsychotic drug-induced dopamine release in rat striatum and nucleus accumbens.
Brain Res.
858, 252–263 (2000).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarMarona-Lewicka, D., Thisted, R. A. & Nichols, D. E. Distinct temporal phases in the behavioral pharmacology of LSD: dopamine D2 receptor-mediated effects in the rat and implications for psychosis.
Psychopharmacologia180, 427–435 (2005).
CASGoogle ScholarPreller, K. H. et al. Changes in global and thalamic brain connectivity in LSD-induced altered states of consciousness are attributable to the 5-HT2Areceptor.
eLife7, e35082 (2018).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarHall, H., Farde, L., Halldin, C., Lundkvist, C. & Sedvall, G. Autoradiographic localization of 5-HT2Areceptors in the human brain using [3H]M100907 and [11C]M100907.
Synapse38, 421–431 (2000).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarSaulin, A., Savli, M. & Lanzenberger, R. Serotonin and molecular neuroimaging in humans using PET.
Amino Acids42, 2039–2057 (2012).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarCelada, P., Puig, M. V. & Artigas, F. Serotonin modulation of cortical neurons and networks.
Front. Integr. Neurosci.
7, 25 (2013).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarMarek, G. J. Interactions of hallucinogens with the glutamatergic system: permissive network effects mediated through cortical layer V pyramidal neurons.
Curr. Top. Behav. Neurosci.
36, 107–135 (2018).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarAghajanian, G. K. & Marek, G. J. Serotonin, via 5-HT2Areceptors, increases EPSCs in layer V pyramidal cells of prefrontal cortex by an asynchronous mode of glutamate release.
Brain Res.
825, 161–171 (1999).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarPuig, M. V., Celada, P., az-Mataix, L. & Artigas, F. In vivo modulation of the activity of pyramidal neurons in the rat medial prefrontal cortex by 5-HT2Areceptors: relationship to thalamocortical afferents.
Cereb. Cortex13, 870–882 (2003).
PubMedGoogle ScholarWood, J., Kim, Y. & Moghaddam, B. Disruption of prefrontal cortex large scale neuronal activity by different classes of psychotomimetic drugs.
J. Neurosci.
32, 3022–3031 (2012).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarLlado-Pelfort, L. et al. Effects of hallucinogens on neuronal activity.
Curr. Top. Behav. Neurosci.
36, 75–105 (2018).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarBeique, J. C., Imad, M., Mladenovic, L., Gingrich, J. A. & Andrade, R. Mechanism of the 5-hydroxytryptamine 2A receptor-mediated facilitation of synaptic activity in prefrontal cortex.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA104, 9870–9875 (2007).
PubMedGoogle ScholarZhang, C. & Marek, G. J. AMPA receptor involvement in 5-hydroxytryptamine 2A receptor-mediated pre-frontal cortical excitatory synaptic currents and DOI-induced head shakes.
Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry32, 62–71 (2008).
PubMedGoogle ScholarAru, J., Suzuki, M., Rutiku, R., Larkum, M. E. & Bachmann, T. Coupling the state and contents of consciousness.
Front. Syst. Neurosci.
13, 43 (2019).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarBarre, A. et al. Presynaptic serotonin 2A receptors modulate thalamocortical plasticity and associative learning.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA113, E1382–E1391 (2016).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarLarkum, M. E., Zhu, J. J. & Sakmann, B. A new cellular mechanism for coupling inputs arriving at different cortical layers.
Nature398, 338–341 (1999).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarLarkum, M. A cellular mechanism for cortical associations: an organizing principle for the cerebral cortex.
Trends Neurosci.
36, 141–151 (2013).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarDisner, S. G., Beevers, C. G., Haigh, E. A. & Beck, A. T. Neural mechanisms of the cognitive model of depression.
Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
12, 467–477 (2011).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarFisher, P. M. & Hariri, A. R. Identifying serotonergic mechanisms underlying the corticolimbic response to threat in humans.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci.
368, 20120192 (2013).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarMeltzer, H. Y. Serotonergic mechanisms as targets for existing and novel antipsychotics.
Handb. Exp. Pharmacol.
212, 87–124 (2012).
CASGoogle ScholarNorthoff, G. Self and brain: what is self-related processing?Trends Cogn. Sci.
15, 186–187 (2011).
PubMedGoogle ScholarCarhart-Harris, R. L., Brugger, S., Nutt, D. J. & Stone, J. M. Psychiatry’s next top model: cause for a re-think on drug models of psychosis and other psychiatric disorders.
J. Psychopharmacol.
27, 771–778 (2013).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarGeyer, M. A. & Vollenweider, F. X. Serotonin research: contributions to understanding psychoses.
Trends Pharmacol. Sci.
29, 445–453 (2008).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarZhang, G. et al. Stimulation of serotonin 2A receptors facilitates consolidation and extinction of fear memory in C57BL/6J mice.
Neuropharmacology64, 403–413 (2013).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarCatlow, B. J., Song, S., Paredes, D. A., Kirstein, C. L. & Sanchez-Ramos, J. Effects of psilocybin on hippocampal neurogenesis and extinction of trace fear conditioning.
Exp. Brain Res.
228, 481–491 (2013).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarLy, C. et al. Psychedelics promote structural and functional neural plasticity.
Cell Rep.
23, 3170–3182 (2018).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarMuschamp, J. W., Regina, M. J., Hull, E. M., Winter, J. C. & Rabin, R. A. Lysergic acid diethylamide and [–]-2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylamphetamine increase extracellular glutamate in rat prefrontal cortex.
Brain Res.
1023, 134–140 (2004).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarScruggs, J. L., Schmidt, D. & Deutch, A. Y. The hallucinogen 1-[2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodophenyl]-2-aminopropane (DOI) increases cortical extracellular glutamate levels in rats.
Neurosci. Lett.
346, 137–140 (2003).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarVaidya, V. A., Marek, G. J., Aghajanian, G. K. & Duman, R. S. 5-HT2Areceptor-mediated regulation of brain-derived neurotrophic factor mRNA in the hippocampus and the neocortex.
J. Neurosci.
17, 2785–2795 (1997).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarJourdi, H. et al. Positive AMPA receptor modulation rapidly stimulates BDNF release and increases dendritic mRNA translation.
J. Neurosci.
29, 8688–8697 (2009).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarRex, C. S. et al. Restoration of long-term potentiation in middle-aged hippocampus after induction of brain-derived neurotrophic factor.
J. Neurophysiol.
96, 677–685 (2006).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarGoff, D. C. et al. A placebo-controlled add-on trial of the Ampakine, CX516, for cognitive deficits in schizophrenia.
Neuropsychopharmacology33, 465–472 (2008).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarBerthoux, C., Barre, A., Bockaert, J., Marin, P. & Becamel, C. Sustained activation of postsynaptic 5-HT2Areceptors gates plasticity at prefrontal cortex synapses.
Cereb. Cortex29, 1659–1669 (2019).
PubMedGoogle ScholarVollenweider, F. X. & Geyer, M. A. A systems model of altered consciousness: integrating natural and drug-induced psychoses.
Brain Res. Bull.
56, 495–507 (2001).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarSwerdlow, N. R., Geyer, M. A. & Braff, D. L. Neural circuit regulation of prepulse inhibition of startle in the rat: current knowledge and future challenges.
Psychopharmacology156, 194–215 (2001).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarCarhart-Harris, R. L. & Friston, K. J. REBUS and the anarchic brain: toward a unified model of the brain action of psychedelics.
Pharmacol. Rev.
71, 316–344 (2019).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarSipes, T. E. & Geyer, M. A. DOI disrupts prepulse inhibition of startle in rats via 5-HT2Areceptors in the ventral pallidum.
Brain Res.
761, 97–104 (1997).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarVollenweider, F. X., Csomor, P. A., Knappe, B., Geyer, M. A. & Quednow, B. B. The effects of the preferential 5-HT2Aagonist psilocybin on prepulse inhibition of startle in healthy human volunteers depend on interstimulus interval.
Neuropsychopharmacology32, 1876–1887 (2007).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarQuednow, B. B., Kometer, M., Geyer, M. A. & Vollenweider, F. X. Psilocybin-induced deficits in automatic and controlled inhibition are attenuated by ketanserin in healthy human volunteers.
Neuropsychopharmacology37, 630–640 (2012).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarSchmid, Y. et al. Acute effects of lysergic acid diethylamide in healthy subjects.
Biol. Psychiatry78, 544–553 (2015).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarRiba, J., Rodriguez-Fornells, A. & Barbanoj, M. J. Effects of ayahuasca on sensory and sensorimotor gating in humans as measured by P50 suppression and prepulse inhibition of the startle reflex, respectively.
Psychopharmacology165, 18–28 (2002).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarMuller, F. et al. Increased thalamic resting-state connectivity as a core driver of LSD-induced hallucinations.
Acta Psychiatr. Scand.
136, 648–657 (2017).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarPreller, K. H. et al. Effective connectivity changes in LSD-induced altered states of consciousness in humans.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA116, 2743–2748 (2019).
PubMedGoogle ScholarVollenweider, F. X. et al. Positron emission tomography and fluorodeoxyglucose studies of metabolic hyperfrontality and psychopathology in the psilocybin model of psychosis.
Neuropsychopharmacology16, 357–372 (1997).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarGouzoulis-Mayfrank, E. et al. Neurometabolic effects of psilocybin, 3,4-methylenedioxyethylamphetamine (MDE) andd-methamphetamine in healthy volunteers. A double-blind, placebo-controlled PET study with [18F]FDG.
Neuropsychopharmacology20, 565–581 (1999).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarVollenweider, F. X. Advances and pathophysiological models of hallucinogenic drug actions in humans: a preamble to schizophrenia research.
Pharmacopsychiatry31(Suppl. 2), 92–103 (1998).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarRiba, J. et al. Increased frontal and paralimbic activation following ayahuasca, the pan-Amazonian inebriant.
Psychopharmacology186, 93–98 (2006).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarHermle, L. et al. Mescaline-induced psychopathological, neuropsychological, and neurometabolic effects in normal subjects — experimental psychosis as a tool for psychiatric research.
Biol. Psychiat32, 976–991 (1992).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarLewis, C. R. et al. Two dose investigation of the 5-HT-agonist psilocybin on relative and global cerebral blood flow.
Neuroimage159, 70–78 (2017).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarCarhart-Harris, R. L. et al. Neural correlates of the psychedelic state as determined by fMRI studies with psilocybin.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA109, 2138–2143 (2012).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarCarhart-Harris, R. L. et al. Neural correlates of the LSD experience revealed by multimodal neuroimaging.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA113, 4853–4858 (2016).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarAnticevic, A. et al. Association of thalamic dysconnectivity and conversion to psychosis in youth and young adults at elevated clinical risk.
JAMA Psychiat72, 882–891 (2015).
Google ScholarMcAlonan, K., Cavanaugh, J. & Wurtz, R. H. Guarding the gateway to cortex with attention in visual thalamus.
Nature456, 391–394 (2008).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarKometer, M., Pokorny, T., Seifritz, E. & Vollenweider, F. X. Psilocybin-induced spiritual experiences and insightfulness are associated with synchronization of neuronal oscillations.
Psychopharmacology232, 3663–3676 (2015).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarMuller, F., Dolder, P. C., Schmidt, A., Liechti, M. E. & Borgwardt, S. Altered network hub connectivity after acute LSD administration.
Neuroimage Clin.
18, 694–701 (2018).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarCarhart-Harris, R. L. et al. Functional connectivity measures after psilocybin inform a novel hypothesis of early psychosis.
Schizophr. Bull.
39, 1343–1351 (2013).
PubMedGoogle ScholarRoseman, L., Leech, R., Feilding, A., Nutt, D. J. & Carhart-Harris, R. L. The effects of psilocybin and MDMA on between-network resting state functional connectivity in healthy volunteers.
Front. Hum. Neurosci.
8, 204 (2014).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarPalhano-Fontes, F. et al. The psychedelic state induced by ayahuasca modulates the activity and connectivity of the default mode network.
PLoS ONE10, e0118143 (2015).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarPreller, K. H. et al. Psilocybin induces time-dependent changes in global functional connectivity.
Biol. Psychiatry88, 197–207 (2020).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarKomorowski, A. et al. Association of protein distribution and gene expression revealed by PET and post-mortem quantification in the serotonergic system of the human brain.
Cereb. Cortex27, 117–130 (2017).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarLord, L. D. et al. Dynamical exploration of the repertoire of brain networks at rest is modulated by psilocybin.
Neuroimage199, 127–142 (2019).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarTagliazucchi, E. et al. Increased global functional connectivity correlates with LSD-induced ego dissolution.
Curr. Biol.
26, 1043–1050 (2016).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarMuller, F., Liechti, M. E., Lang, U. E. & Borgwardt, S. Advances and challenges in neuroimaging studies on the effects of serotonergic hallucinogens: contributions of the resting brain.
Prog. Brain Res.
242, 159–177 (2018).
PubMedGoogle ScholarFox, M. D. et al. The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic, anticorrelated functional networks.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA102, 9673–9678 (2005).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarTurner, B. O., Paul, E. J., Miller, M. B. & Barbey, A. K. Small sample sizes reduce the replicability of task-based fMRI studies.
Commun. Biol.
1, 62 (2018).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarMumford, J. A. & Nichols, T. E. Power calculation for group fMRI studies accounting for arbitrary design and temporal autocorrelation.
Neuroimage39, 261–268 (2008).
PubMedGoogle ScholarZandbelt, B. B. et al. Within-subject variation in BOLD-fMRI signal changes across repeated measurements: quantification and implications for sample size.
Neuroimage42, 196–206 (2008).
PubMedGoogle ScholarMuthukumaraswamy, S. D. et al. Broadband cortical desynchronization underlies the human psychedelic state.
J. Neurosci.
33, 15171–15183 (2013).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarKlaassens, B. L. et al. Single-dose serotonergic stimulation shows widespread effects on functional brain connectivity.
Neuroimage122, 440–450 (2015).
PubMedGoogle ScholarMathys, C. D. et al. Uncertainty in perception and the hierarchical Gaussian filter.
Front. Hum. Neurosci.
8, 825 (2014).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarCarhart-Harris, R. L. et al. The entropic brain: a theory of conscious states informed by neuroimaging research with psychedelic drugs.
Front. Hum. Neurosci.
8, 20 (2014).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarCarhart-Harris, R. L. The entropic brain — revisited.
Neuropharmacology142, 167–178 (2018).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarSchartner, M. M., Carhart-Harris, R. L., Barrett, A. B., Seth, A. K. & Muthukumaraswamy, S. D. Increased spontaneous MEG signal diversity for psychoactive doses of ketamine, LSD and psilocybin.
Sci. Rep.
7, 46421 (2017).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarTimmermann, C. et al. Neural correlates of the DMT experience assessed with multivariate EEG.
Sci. Rep.
9, 16324 (2019).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarLebedev, A. V. et al. LSD-induced entropic brain activity predicts subsequent personality change.
Hum. Brain Mapp.
37, 3203–3213 (2016).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarAtasoy, S. et al. Connectome-harmonic decomposition of human brain activity reveals dynamical repertoire re-organization under LSD.
Sci. Rep.
7, 17661 (2017).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarTagliazucchi, E., Carhart-Harris, R., Leech, R., Nutt, D. & Chialvo, D. R. Enhanced repertoire of brain dynamical states during the psychedelic experience.
Hum. Brain Mapp.
35, 5442–5456 (2014).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarViol, A., Palhano-Fontes, F., Onias, H., de Araujo, D. B. & Viswanathan, G. M. Shannon entropy of brain functional complex networks under the influence of the psychedelic ayahuasca.
Sci. Rep.
7, 7388 (2017).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarTimmermann, C. et al. LSD modulates effective connectivity and neural adaptation mechanisms in an auditory oddball paradigm.
Neuropharmacology142, 251–262 (2018).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarUmbricht, D. et al. Effects of the 5-HT2Aagonist psilocybin on mismatch negativity generation and AX-continuous performance task: implications for the neuropharmacology of cognitive deficits in schizophrenia.
Neuropsychopharmacology28, 170–181 (2003).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarSchmidt, A. et al. Mismatch negativity encoding of prediction errors predictsS-ketamine-induced cognitive impairments.
Neuropsychopharmacology37, 865–875 (2012).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarSandison, R. A. & Whitelaw, J. D. Further studies in the therapeutic value of lysergic acid diethylamide in mental illness.
J. Ment. Sci.
103, 332–343 (1957).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarStuderus, E., Kometer, M., Hasler, F. & Vollenweider, F. X. Acute, subacute and long-term subjective effects of psilocybin in healthy humans: a pooled analysis of experimental studies.
J. Psychopharmacol.
25, 1434–1452 (2011).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarRoseman, L. et al. Emotional breakthrough and psychedelics: validation of the emotional breakthrough inventory.
J. Psychopharmacol.
33, 1076–1087 (2019).
PubMedGoogle ScholarCarhart-Harris, R. L. et al. Implications for psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy: functional magnetic resonance imaging study with psilocybin.
Br. J. Psychiatry200, 238–244 (2012).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarDolder, P. C., Schmid, Y., Muller, F., Borgwardt, S. & Liechti, M. E. LSD acutely impairs fear recognition and enhances emotional empathy and sociality.
Neuropsychopharmacology41, 2638–2646 (2016).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarKometer, M. et al. Psilocybin biases facial recognition, goal-directed behavior, and mood state toward positive relative to negative emotions through different serotonergic subreceptors.
Biol. Psychiatry72, 898–906 (2012).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarBershad, A., Schepers, S., Bremmer, M. & de Wit, H. Subjective and behavioral effects of microdoses of LSD in healthy human volunteers.
Biol. Psychiatry85, S345–S345 (2019).
Google ScholarSchmidt, A., Kometer, M., Bachmann, R., Seifritz, E. & Vollenweider, F. X. The NMDA antagonist ketamine and the 5-HT agonist psilocybin produce dissociable effects on structural encoding of emotional face expressions.
Psychopharmacology225, 227–239 (2013).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarBernasconi, F. et al. Spatiotemporal brain dynamics of emotional face processing modulations induced by the serotonin 1A/2A receptor agonist psilocybin.
Cereb. Cortex24, 3221–3231 (2014).
PubMedGoogle ScholarMueller, F. et al. Acute effects of LSD on amygdala activity during processing of fearful stimuli in healthy subjects.
Transl Psychiatry7, e1084 (2017).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarKraehenmann, R. et al. Psilocybin-induced decrease in amygdala reactivity correlates with enhanced positive mood in healthy volunteers.
Biol. Psychiatry78, 572–581 (2015).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarKraehenmann, R. et al. The mixed serotonin receptor agonist psilocybin reduces threat-induced modulation of amygdala connectivity.
Neuroimage Clin.
11, 53–60 (2016).
PubMedGoogle ScholarGrimm, O., Kraehenmann, R., Preller, K. H., Seifritz, E. & Vollenweider, F. X. Psilocybin modulates functional connectivity of the amygdala during emotional face discrimination.
Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol.
28, 691–700 (2018).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarBershad, A. K. et al. Preliminary report on the effects of a low dose of LSD on resting-state amygdala functional connectivity.
Biol. Psychiatry Cogn. Neurosci. Neuroimaging5, 461–467 (2020).
PubMedGoogle ScholarBarrett, F. S., Doss, M. K., Sepeda, N. D., Pekar, J. J. & Griffiths, R. R. Emotions and brain function are altered up to one month after a single high dose of psilocybin.
Sci. Rep.
10, 2214 (2020).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarStroud, J. B. et al. Psilocybin with psychological support improves emotional face recognition in treatment-resistant depression.
Psychopharmacology235, 459–466 (2018).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarRoseman, L., Demetriou, L., Wall, M. B., Nutt, D. J. & Carhart-Harris, R. L. Increased amygdala responses to emotional faces after psilocybin for treatment-resistant depression.
Neuropharmacology142, 263–269 (2018).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarMertens, L. J. et al. Therapeutic mechanisms of psilocybin: changes in amygdala and prefrontal functional connectivity during emotional processing after psilocybin for treatment-resistant depression.
J. Psychopharmacol.
34, 167–180 (2020).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarMilliere, R., Carhart-Harris, R. L., Roseman, L., Trautwein, F. M. & Berkovich-Ohana, A. Psychedelics, meditation, and self-consciousness.
Front. Psychol.
9, 1475 (2018).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarNorthoff, G. & Bermpohl, F. Cortical midline structures and the self.
Trends Cogn. Sci.
8, 102–107 (2004).
PubMedGoogle ScholarKometer, M., Schmidt, A., Jancke, L. & Vollenweider, F. X. Activation of serotonin 2A receptors underlies the psilocybin-induced effects on alpha oscillations, N170 visual-evoked potentials, and visual hallucinations.
J. Neurosci.
33, 10544–10551 (2013).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarLebedev, A. V. et al. Finding the self by losing the self: neural correlates of ego-dissolution under psilocybin.
Hum. Brain Mapp.
36, 3137–3153 (2015).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarNour, M. M. & Carhart-Harris, R. L. Psychedelics and the science of self-experience.
Br. J. Psychiatry210, 177–179 (2017).
PubMedGoogle ScholarGarcia-Romeu, A., Griffiths, R. R. & Johnson, M. W. Psilocybin-occasioned mystical experiences in the treatment of tobacco addiction.
Curr. Drug Abuse Rev.
7, 157–164 (2014).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarRoss, S. et al. Rapid and sustained symptom reduction following psilocybin treatment for anxiety and depression in patients with life-threatening cancer: a randomized controlled trial.
J. Psychopharmacol.
30, 1165–1180 (2016).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarBogenschutz, M. P. et al. Psilocybin-assisted treatment for alcohol dependence: a proof-of-concept study.
J. Psychopharmacol.
29, 289–299 (2015).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarGriffiths, R. R. et al. Psilocybin produces substantial and sustained decreases in depression and anxiety in patients with life-threatening cancer: a randomized double-blind trial.
J. Psychopharmacol.
30, 1181–1197 (2016).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarRoseman, L., Nutt, D. J. & Carhart-Harris, R. L. Quality of acute psychedelic experience predicts therapeutic efficacy of psilocybin for treatment-resistant depression.
Front. Pharmacol.
8, 974 (2017).
PubMedGoogle ScholarPokorny, T., Preller, K. H., Kometer, M., Dziobek, I. & Vollenweider, F. X. Effect of psilocybin on empathy and moral decision-making.
Int. J. Neuropsychopharmacol.
20, 747–757 (2017).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarSchilbach, L. Towards a second-person neuropsychiatry.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci.
371, 20150081 (2016).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarMillan, M. J. et al. Cognitive dysfunction in psychiatric disorders: characteristics, causes and the quest for improved therapy.
Nat. Rev. Drug. Discov.
11, 141–168 (2012).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarGriffiths, R. R. et al. Psilocybin-occasioned mystical-type experience in combination with meditation and other spiritual practices produces enduring positive changes in psychological functioning and in trait measures of prosocial attitudes and behaviors.
J. Psychopharmacol.
32, 49–69 (2018).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarGriffiths, R. R., Richards, W., Johnson, M., McCann, U. & Jesse, R. Mystical-type experiences occasioned by psilocybin mediate the attribution of personal meaning and spiritual significance 14 months later.
J. Psychopharmacol.
22, 621–632 (2008).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarGriffiths, R. R. et al. Psilocybin occasioned mystical-type experiences: immediate and persisting dose-related effects.
Psychopharmacology218, 649–665 (2011).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarGriffiths, R. R., Richards, W. A., McCann, U. & Jesse, R. Psilocybin can occasion mystical-type experiences having substantial and sustained personal meaning and spiritual significance.
Psychopharmacology187, 268–283 (2006).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarSchmid, Y. & Liechti, M. E. Long-lasting subjective effects of LSD in normal subjects.
Psychopharmacology235, 535–545 (2018).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarSmigielski, L., Scheidegger, M., Kometer, M. & Vollenweider, F. X. Psilocybin-assisted mindfulness training modulates self-consciousness and brain default mode network connectivity with lasting effects.
Neuroimage196, 207–215 (2019).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarSmigielski, L. et al. Characterization and prediction of acute and sustained response to psychedelic psilocybin in a mindfulness group retreat.
Sci. Rep.
9, 14914 (2019).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarMason, N. L., Mischler, E., Uthaug, M. V. & Kuypers, K. P. C. Sub-acute effects of psilocybin on empathy, creative thinking, and subjective well-being.
J. Psychoactive Drugs51, 123–134 (2019).
PubMedGoogle ScholarNoorani, T., Garcia-Romeu, A., Swift, T. C., Griffiths, R. R. & Johnson, M. W. Psychedelic therapy for smoking cessation: qualitative analysis of participant accounts.
J. Psychopharmacol.
32, 756–769 (2018).
PubMedGoogle ScholarWatts, R., Day, C., Krzanowski, J., Nutt, D. & Carhart-Harris, R. Patients’ accounts of increased “connectedness” and “acceptance” after psilocybin for treatment-resistant depression.
J. Humanist. Psychol.
57, 520–564 (2017).
Google ScholarSchenberg, E. E. et al. Acute biphasic effects of ayahuasca.
PLoS ONE10, e0137202 (2015).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarPallavicini, C. et al. Spectral signatures of serotonergic psychedelics and glutamatergic dissociatives.
Neuroimage200, 281–291 (2019).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarKometer, M. & Vollenweider, F. X. Serotonergic hallucinogen-induced visual perceptual alterations.
Curr. Top. Behav. Neurosci.
36, 257–282 (2018).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarRoseman, L. et al. LSD alters eyes-closed functional connectivity within the early visual cortex in a retinotopic fashion.
Hum. Brain Mapp.
37, 3031–3040 (2016).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle Scholarde Araujo, D. B. et al. Seeing with the eyes shut: neural basis of enhanced imagery following ayahuasca ingestion.
Hum. Brain Mapp.
33, 2550–2560 (2012).
PubMedGoogle ScholarKometer, M., Cahn, B. R., Andel, D., Carter, O. L. & Vollenweider, F. X. The 5-HT2A/1Aagonist psilocybin disrupts modal object completion associated with visual hallucinations.
Biol. Psychiatry69, 399–406 (2011).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarSinke, C. et al. Genuine and drug-induced synesthesia: a comparison.
Conscious. Cogn.
21, 1419–1434 (2012).
PubMedGoogle ScholarKaelen, M. et al. LSD modulates music-induced imagery via changes in parahippocampal connectivity.
Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol.
26, 1099–1109 (2016).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarReininghaus, U. et al. Stress sensitivity, aberrant salience, and threat anticipation in early psychosis: an experience sampling study.
Schizophr. Bull.
43, 712–722 (2016).
Google ScholarMoeller, S. J. & Goldstein, R. Z. Impaired self-awareness in human addiction: deficient attribution of personal relevance.
Trends Cogn. Sci.
18, 635–641 (2014).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarPyszczynski, T. & Greenberg, J. Self-regulatory perseveration and the depressive self-focusing style: a self-awareness theory of reactive depression.
Psychol. Bull.
102, 122–138 (1987).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarSeidl, E. et al. Response to ostracism in patients with chronic depression, episodic depression and borderline personality disorder a study using Cyberball.
J. Affect. Disord.
260, 254–262 (2020).
PubMedGoogle ScholarAmargos-Bosch, M. et al. Co-expression and in vivo interaction of serotonin 1A and serotonin 2A receptors in pyramidal neurons of prefrontal cortex.
Cereb. Cortex14, 281–299 (2004).
PubMedGoogle ScholarLambe, E. K. & Aghajanian, G. K. Hallucinogen-induced UP states in the brain slice of rat prefrontal cortex: role of glutamate spillover and NR2B–NMDA receptors.
Neuropsychopharmacology31, 1682–1689 (2006).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarAghajanian, G. K. & Marek, G. J. Serotonin model of schizophrenia: emerging role of glutamate mechanisms.
Brain Res. Rev.
31, 302–312 (2000).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarMarek, G. J., Wright, R. A., Gewirtz, J. C. & Schoepp, D. D. A major role for thalamocortical afferents in serotonergic hallucinogen receptor function in the rat neocortex.
Neuroscience105, 379–392 (2001).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarLlado-Pelfort, L., Santana, N., Ghisi, V., Artigas, F. & Celada, P. 5-HT1Areceptor agonists enhance pyramidal cell firing in prefrontal cortex through a preferential action on GABA interneurons.
Cereb. Cortex22, 1487–1497 (2012).
PubMedGoogle ScholarMarek, G. J. & Aghajanian, G. K. LSD and the phenethylamine hallucinogen DOI are potent partial agonists at 5-HT2Areceptors on interneurons in rat piriform cortex.
J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.
278, 1373–1382 (1996).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarMartin-Ruiz, R. et al. Control of serotonergic function in medial prefrontal cortex by serotonin-2A receptors through a glutamate-dependent mechanism.
J. Neurosci.
21, 9856–9866 (2001).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarDittrich, A. The standardized psychometric assessment of altered states of consciousness (ASCs) in humans.
Pharmacopsychiatry31(Suppl. 2), 80–84 (1998).
PubMedGoogle ScholarStuderus, E., Gamma, A. & Vollenweider, F. X. Psychometric evaluation of the altered states of consciousness rating scale (OAV).
PLoS ONE5, e12412 (2010).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarDittrich, A., Lamparter, D. & Maurer, M.
5D-ABZ: Fragebogen zur Erfassung Aussergewöhnlicher Bewusstseinszustände. Eine kurze Einführung[5D-ASC: Questionnaire for the Assessment of Altered States of Consciousness. A Short Introduction] (PSIN Plus, 2006).
Liechti, M. E., Dolder, P. C. & Schmid, Y. Alterations of consciousness and mystical-type experiences after acute LSD in humans.
Psychopharmacology234, 1499–1510 (2017).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarMurphy, K., Birn, R. M. & Bandettini, P. A. Resting-state fMRI confounds and cleanup.
Neuroimage80, 349–359 (2013).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarMurphy, K. & Fox, M. D. Towards a consensus regarding global signal regression for resting state functional connectivity MRI.
Neuroimage154, 169–173 (2017).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarYang, G. J. et al. Altered global signal topography in schizophrenia.
Cereb. Cortex27, 5156–5169 (2017).
PubMedGoogle ScholarAlmgren, H., Van de Steen, F., Razi, A., Friston, K. & Marinazzo, D. The effect of global signal regression on DCM estimates of noise and effective connectivity from resting state fMRI.
Neuroimage208, 116435 (2020).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarWang, Z. Improving cerebral blood flow quantification for arterial spin labeled perfusion MRI by removing residual motion artifacts and global signal fluctuations.
Magn. Reson. Imaging30, 1409–1415 (2012).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarViviani, R., Abler, B., Seeringer, A. & Stingl, J. C. Effect of paroxetine and bupropion on human resting brain perfusion: an arterial spin labeling study.
Neuroimage61, 773–779 (2012).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarHandley, R. et al. Acute effects of single-dose aripiprazole and haloperidol on resting cerebral blood flow (rCBF) in the human brain.
Hum. Brain Mapp.
34, 272–282 (2013).
PubMedGoogle ScholarGoldberg, S. B., Pace, B. T., Nicholas, C. R., Raison, C. L. & Hutson, P. R. The experimental effects of psilocybin on symptoms of anxiety and depression: a meta-analysis.
Psychiatry Res.
284, 112749 (2020).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarJohnson, M. W., Garcia-Romeu, A., Cosimano, M. P. & Griffiths, R. R. Pilot study of the 5-HT2AR agonist psilocybin in the treatment of tobacco addiction.
J. Psychopharmacol.
28, 983–992 (2014).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarOsorio Fde, L. et al. Antidepressant effects of a single dose of ayahuasca in patients with recurrent depression: a preliminary report.
Rev. Bras. Psiquiatr.
37, 13–20 (2015).
PubMedGoogle ScholarSanches, R. F. et al. Antidepressant effects of a single dose of ayahuasca in patients with recurrent depression: a SPECT study.
J. Clin. Psychopharmacol.
36, 77–81 (2016).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarCarhart-Harris, R. L. et al. Psilocybin with psychological support for treatment-resistant depression: an open-label feasibility study.
Lancet Psychiatry3, 619–627 (2016).
PubMedGoogle ScholarCarhart-Harris, R. L. et al. Psilocybin with psychological support for treatment-resistant depression: six-month follow-up.
Psychopharmacology235, 399–408 (2018).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarCarhart-Harris, R. L. et al. Psilocybin for treatment-resistant depression: fMRI-measured brain mechanisms.
Sci. Rep.
7, 13187 (2017).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarBrakowski, J. et al. Resting state brain network function in major depression — depression symptomatology, antidepressant treatment effects, future research.
J. Psychiatr. Res.
92, 147–159 (2017).
PubMedGoogle ScholarGasser, P. et al. Safety and efficacy of lysergic acid diethylamide-assisted psychotherapy for anxiety associated with life-threatening diseases.
J. Nerv. Ment. Dis.
202, 513–520 (2014).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarPalhano-Fontes, F. et al. Rapid antidepressant effects of the psychedelic ayahuasca in treatment-resistant depression: a randomized placebo-controlled trial.
Psychol. Med.
49, 655–663 (2019).
PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarGrob, C. S. et al. Pilot study of psilocybin treatment for anxiety in patients with advanced-stage cancer.
Arch. Gen. Psychiatry68, 71–78 (2011).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarGasser, P., Kirchner, K. & Passie, T. LSD-assisted psychotherapy for anxiety associated with a life-threatening disease: a qualitative study of acute and sustained subjective effects.
J. Psychopharmacol.
29, 57–68 (2015).
PubMedGoogle ScholarDownload referencesAcknowledgementsThis work was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation (to F.X.V. and K.H.P), the Swiss Neuromatrix Foundation (to F.X.V. and K.H.P.), the Heffter Research Institute (to F.X.V.) and the Carey and Claudia Turnbull Foundation N.Y. (to F.X.V.).
Author informationAffiliationsNeuropsychopharmacology and Brain Imaging, Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, University Hospital for Psychiatry Zurich, Zurich, SwitzerlandFranz X. Vollenweider & Katrin H. PrellerYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarContributionsThe authors contributed equally to all aspects of the article.
Corresponding authorCorrespondence toFranz X. Vollenweider.
Ethics declarationsCompeting interestsThe authors declare no competing interests.
Additional informationPeer review informationNature Reviews Neurosciencethanks K. Friston, J. González-Maeso, M Johnson, M. Massimini and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Publisher’s noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
GlossaryA therapy model that refers to the adjuvant use of one or a few doses of a classic psychedelic in combination with psychotherapeutic support. The process will commonly include a few drug-free preparation sessions, followed by a drug session and a few follow-up integration sessions of the psychedelic experience.
A nuclear medicine functional imaging technique that uses radioligands to assess metabolic processes and receptor density and occupancy in the brain.
Temporary depolarizations of the postsynaptic neuronal membrane potential that make it more likely that the neuron will exert an action potential.
A self-generated network activity that arises from the recurrent synaptic architecture of the cortex. One form of such activity is the up state, in which neurons transiently receive bombardments of excitatory and inhibitory synaptic inputs that depolarize many neurons to the spike threshold before returning to a relatively quiescent down state.
The brain’s ability to reorganize itself by forming new neural connections throughout life. Neuroplasticity allows the neurons in the brain to compensate for injury and disease, and to adjust their activities in response to new situations or to changes in their environment.
Long-lasting, activity-dependent decreases in synaptic strength.
(fMRI). A neuroimaging technique that measures brain activity by detecting changes associated with blood flow.
A framework for inferring the causal architecture of coupled or distributed dynamic systems, which allows the coupling between brain regions to be estimated.
The prior probability distributions in Bayesian statistical inference, which express one’s beliefs before some evidence is taken into account.
An imaging method used to quantify cerebral blood perfusion by magnetic labelling of arterial blood.
A signal detected in functional MRI and used to investigate regional brain activity changes.
Brain networks determined by their spatially independent and temporally correlated functional connectivity.
(DMN). A brain network consisting of various large regions, such as the posterior cingulate cortex, precuneus, medial prefrontal cortex and angular gyrus.
A class of drugs increasing the level of serotonin by inhibiting the reuptake into the presynaptic cell, used to treat depression and anxiety disorders.
A framework that views the brain as an organ of inference that is constantly generating and updating a mental model of the environment.
A measure of uncertainty about a dynamical phenomenon (in this context, neuronal fluctuations across time).
An imaging technique used to map brain activity by recording magnetic fields produced by electrical currents in the brain.
An electrophysiological imaging method that records the electrical activity of the brain using electrodes placed on the scalp.
Neural oscillations in the frequency range of 8–12 Hz that can be measured using electroencephalography or magnetoencephalography.
A perceptual phenomenon in which stimulation of one sensory modality leads to experiences in a second sensory modality.
Studies involving the administration of a pharmacological substance.
Rights and permissionsReprints and PermissionsAbout this articleCite this articleVollenweider, F.X., Preller, K.H. Psychedelic drugs: neurobiology and potential for treatment of psychiatric disorders.
Nat Rev Neurosci21,611–624 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583-020-0367-2Download citationAccepted:07 August 2020Published:14 September 2020Issue Date:November 2020DOI:https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583-020-0367-2Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.
Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiativeFurther readingThe psychological processes of classic psychedelics in the treatment of depression: a systematic review protocolSystematic Reviews(2022)Psilocin acutely alters sleep-wake architecture and cortical brain activity in laboratory miceTranslational Psychiatry(2022)Prefrontal contributions to the stability and variability of thought and conscious experienceNeuropsychopharmacology(2022)Repeated lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) reverses stress-induced anxiety-like behavior, cortical synaptogenesis deficits and serotonergic neurotransmission declineNeuropsychopharmacology(2022)The use patterns of novel psychedelics: experiential fingerprints of substituted phenethylamines, tryptamines and lysergamidesPsychopharmacology(2022)You have full access to this article via your institution.
AdvertisementExplore contentAbout the journalPublish with usSearchAdvanced searchQuick linksNature Reviews Neuroscience (Nat Rev Neurosci)ISSN1471-0048(online)ISSN1471-003X(print)nature.com sitemapDiscover contentPublishing policiesAuthor & Researcher servicesLibraries & institutionsAdvertising & partnershipsCareer developmentRegional websitesLegal & Privacy© 2022 Springer Nature LimitedSign up for theNature Briefingnewsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily.
