old id = 2486
To Extend Our Longevity, First We Must Understand Why We Age
2020
https://singularityhub.com/2019/01/24/to-extend-our-longevity-first-we-must-understand-why-we-age

To Extend Our Longevity, First We Must Understand Why We AgeHealthcare today is reactive, retrospective, bureaucratic, and expensive. It’s sick care, not healthcare.
But that is radically changing at anexponentialrate.
Through this multi-part blog series on longevity, I’ll take a deep dive into aging,longevity, andhealthcare technologiesthat are working together to dramatically extend the human lifespan, disrupting the $3 trillion healthcare system in the process.
I’ll begin the series by explaining the nine hallmarks of aging, as explained inthis journal article. Next, I’ll break down the emerging technologies and initiatives working to combat these nine hallmarks. Finally, I’ll explore the transformative implications of dramatically extending the human health span.
In this blog I’ll cover:Let’s dive in.
The System is Broken—Here’s the Data:And Yet, We Live in the Healthiest Time in Human HistoryConsider these insights, which I adapted from Max Roser’s excellent databaseOur World in Data:The 9 Mechanisms of Aging*This section was adapted from CB INSIGHTS: The Future Of Aging.
Longevity, healthcare, and aging are intimately linked.
Withbetter healthcare, we can better treat some of the leading causes of death, impacting how long we live.
By investigating how to treat diseases, we’ll inevitably better understand what causes these diseases in the first place, which directly correlates to why we age.
Following are the nine hallmarks of aging. I’ll share examples of health and longevity technologies addressing each of these later in this blog series.
ConclusionOver the past 200 years, we have seen anabundance of healthcare technologiesenable a massive lifespan boom.
Now,exponential technologieslikeartificial intelligence,3D printingand sensors, as well as tremendous advancements ingenomics,stem cell research, chemistry, and many other fields, are beginning to tackle the fundamental issues of why we age.
In the next blog in this series, we will dive into how genome sequencing and editing, along with new classes of drugs, are augmenting our biology to further extend our healthy lives.
What will you be able to achieve with an extra 30 to 50 healthy years (or longer) in your lifespan? Personally, I’m excited for a near-infinite lifespan to take on moonshots.
Join Me(1) A360 Executive Mastermind:If you’re an exponentially and abundance-minded entrepreneur who would like coaching directly from me, consider joining my Abundance 360 Mastermind, a highly selective community of 360 CEOs and entrepreneurs who I coach for 3 days every January in Beverly Hills, Ca. Through A360, I provide my members with context and clarity about how converging exponential technologies will transform every industry. I’m committed to running A360 for the course of an ongoing 25-year journey as a “countdown to the Singularity.”If you’d like to learn more and consider joining our 2020 membership,apply here.
(2) Abundance-Digital Online Community:I’ve also created a Digital/Online community of bold, abundance-minded entrepreneurs called Abundance-Digital. Abundance-Digital is Singularity University’s ‘onramp’ for exponential entrepreneurs — those who want to get involved and play at a higher level.
Click here to learn more.
(Both A360 and Abundance-Digital are part of Singularity University—your participation opens you to a global community.)This article originally appeared ondiamandis.com. Read theoriginal article here.
Image Credit:David Carbo/Shutterstock.comFollow Peter H.:LatestThis Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through May 21)Volvo and DHL Are Partnering on Hub-to-Hub Autonomous TruckingHow a Volcanic Bombardment in Ancient Australia Led to the World’s Greatest Climate CatastropheRELATEDHow a Volcanic Bombardment in Ancient Australia Led to the World’s Greatest Climate CatastropheDemocracy Is Ailing. Here’s How We Can Start Reviving ItA One-and-Done CRISPR Gene Therapy Will Aim to Prevent Heart AttacksHow the Extinction of Ice Age Mammals May Have Forced Us to Invent CivilizationGet the latest news from Singularity Hub!Singularity University, Singularity Hub, Singularity Summit, SU Labs, Singularity Labs, Exponential Medicine, Exponential Finance and all associated logos and design elements are trademarks and/or service marks of Singularity Education Group.
© 2022 Singularity Education Group. All Rights Reserved.
Singularity University is not a degree granting institution.
