old id = 3788
Astrology Sign Love Compatibility: Which Zodiac Sign Is Best to Date vs. Avoid | Allure
2020
https://www.allure.com/story/astrology-sign-love-compatibility

Zodiac Love Compatibility: Which Signs to Date — And Which to AvoidByAliza KellyandSophie Saint ThomasRead what your sign's 2020 horoscope predictions mean for youright here, or check out yourmonthly horoscopes here.
It's a wild time to date. Dating apps connect us to people we never would have met in real life. As our understanding of love, relationships, orientation,and genderevolve there are more ways than ever to find the right person (or people) for you. However, whether you're straight, queer,monogamous or polyamorous, the pick-up line "what's your sign?" is as useful as ever. In addition to breaking the ice on a first date, knowing you and your potential match's sign can unlock a world of knowledge about where you're compatible (and where you may struggle).
Here's the lowdown onhow to subscribe to Allure's print editionfor more beauty routines, recommendations, and features.
There are a plethora of approaches used by astrologers to calculate celestial compatibility. Astrologers look at synastry, composite charts and midpoints, progressions, and transits to identify the best matches for their clients. While these processes can quickly becomeextremelycomplex and rigorous, even the most seasoned astrologers still evaluate compatibility based on sun sign.
Your sun sign is determined by your birthday, literally where the sun is at your time of birth, and represents your core personality. The most common technique to determine compatibility is based on element: You are always best matched with another fire, earth, air, or water sign. Another approach is to consider your opposite sign (the sign that occurs during your half-birthday): While opposite sign matches can often have a bit of an odd-couple vibe, the counterbalance within these pairs make for some of the most dynamic duos.
The stars can also help you avoid shitty partnerships. Incompatible relationships can manifest in many ways, but at the end of the day, ill-fated matches stifle self-growth, feed insecurities, and create toxic dynamics. Though there’s no single way to spot one, a simple astrological trick used to calculate incompatibility is to identify the signs two away from your own (in either direction).
In astrospeak, these signs create unfavorable “square” aspects — difficult 90-degree angles that create tension, anxiety, and miscommunication.
However, just as our understanding of love is evolving, so is our understanding of astrology. While sun signs, squares, and elements are a fun start, for a full compatibility reading, you must look at you and your potential match's entire chart. For instance, yourVenus signindicates how you approach romance while your Mars sign can indicate how you initiate sex. If you know your birth time, you can do your chart with a quick internet search.
Love is an exciting, scary, and powerful thing — use the cosmic compatibility guide ahead to discover your most and least compatible sun signs and help make sense of it all. Of course, the most accurate assessment will come from the lived experience the universe provides you. Have fun reading who you may be most compatible with, but if you find someone who treats you well and you'resexually compatiblewith, do not end things based on their sun sign. And remember:Allrelationships require hard work, dedication, mutual respect, and trust.
Aries — thefirst sign of the zodiac— are known for their fiery energy, exciting impulsivity, and insatiable desire to bethe best. On a great day, dating an Aries is like partnering with a fierce, unstoppable warrior. On a bad day, however, Aries’ strong will and temper tantrums can become a bit juvenile. They may become cranky if they don't have enough physical affection, including both snuggling and sex.
Coupling with an Aries is not for the faint of heart, but fellow fire signs Leo and Sagittarius have no problem keeping up with these spirited rams. Leo and Sagittarius are inspired by Aries’ enthusiasm and determination, which ultimately ignite their own entrepreneurial passions and creative energy. An Aries and Libra partnership is also worth exploring, as these signs provide much-needed counterbalance to support each other’s best qualities.
More conservative signs Cancer and Capricorns can have a difficult time managing Aries’ spontaneous energy. Similarly, Aries may become bored by these signs’ carefully planned itineraries. If these rams find themselves coupled with the sensitive crab or traditional sea goat, their impulsive nature will benefit from learning to (occasionally) slow down and appreciate the softer, more nuanced sides of life.
Tauruses areearth signs known for their practicality, romanticism, and appreciation for the finer things in life. They love indulging the senses through soft fabrics, enchanting aromas, and delicious cuisine (this earth sign is known for its sweet tooth). Their sensuality translates to the bedroom, and a Taurus will make lovemaking into a decadent experience one never forgets. Pragmatic Virgo and hardworking Capricorn are enchanted by the bull's Venusian qualities and admire their awareness of life’s luxuries.
Opposite sign Scorpio is also an interesting match for Taurus: Scorpio and Taurus are both associated with transformation (represented by autumn and spring), and when matched, these inverted signs can share valuable lessons about change and regeneration.
This sign also has a reputation for being hard-headed and stubborn. Taureans may find their horns locked with fellow obstinate signs Leos and Aquarians.
Noneof these signs like to budge, so a partnership with either of these signs can often feel like arm-wrestling. Taureans who find themselves involved with a Leo or Aquarius should focus on compromise, patience, and flexibility to ensure a healthy, forward-moving relationship.
Datinga Geminiis a truly exhilarating experience! These Mercurial air signs are the social butterflies of the zodiac and need constant stimulation through communication and daily adventures. And yes, that constant stimulation rule applies to the bedroom. These air signs are natural wordsmiths and like-minded air signs Libra and Aquarius deeply appreciate their clever wit and vivacious intellectualism. For this sign, however, oppositesreallyattract: The Sagittarius and Gemini match is one of the most dynamic pairings of the zodiac. These inverted signs are both natural wanderers and, when linked, they can form an incredibly creative, fun-loving power couple (à la Brangelina in their golden era).
On a bad day, however, Gemini has a reputation for being flighty and unreliable. Logical Virgo and intuitive Pisces may struggle with Gemini’s sporadic energy, as these sensitive signs take Gemini’s capricious energywaytoo personally. When paired with a Virgo or Pisces, this sign should be extra compassionate and understanding of their partner’s needs. Remember, there’s nothing wrong withoccasionallyslowing down to mellow out and relax!Cancer isa water signruled by the moon. Although lunar Cancers are extremely sensitive creatures, they need to establish trust and loyalty before revealing their vulnerabilities. Accordingly, fellow water signs Scorpio and Pisces make terrific partners for sweet crabs, as they are known for their incredible intuition and psychic abilities. When coupled, these signs can often communicate through nonverbal (perhaps even telepathic) expression. Though a less emotional sign, hardworking Capricorns deeply appreciate Cancerian sensitivity. A Capricorn and Cancer match is ideal for cohabitation, as these opposite signs both enjoy nesting and building safe spaces. Like Capricorn, Cancer also tends to have a very wild kinky side that isn't afraid to get messy. Don't let their sweaters fool you!This sign may struggle with direct confrontation, and like their astrological spirit animal (the crab), they prefer sidestepping difficult situations. Outspoken Aries and diplomatic Libra aren’t fond of Cancer’s passive-aggressive tendencies, and Cancer matches with these signs can prove challenging. When partnered with Aries or Libra, Cancers should adopt a more straightforward approach to conflict resolution. Aries and Libra will appreciate Cancer’s honesty and this open communication will allow these signs to form an unbreakable bond.
Leosdonotlet you forget that they’re the kings and queens of the jungle. These theatrical fire signs are known for their passionate extravagance, enterprising creativity, and cinematic romances. Getting it on with one of them is a royal experience one never forgets. Ruled by the sun, Leos shine most brightly when matched with fellow fire signs Aries or Sagittarius. Like-minded fire signs embrace their magnetic charisma and are comforted by their lion lover’s loyalty and warmth. Opposite sign Aquarius is also a compelling match for this regal sign: While Leo represents the ruler, Aquarius symbolizes the people. When paired, these two signs can create a powerful checks-and-balances system for each other.
Though theyhateto admit it, Leos can often come off as egotistical and proud. Taurus and Scorpio take issue with Leo’s brazen ostentation, and fiery lions may find themselves growling at the stubborn bull and biting scorpion. When coupled with either of these signs, Leos should make sure their motives aren’t excessively self-interested and adopt a more easygoing attitude to ensure an equally balanced partnership.
Earth sign Virgosare known for their extreme intellectualism. Ruled by Mercury, they are always processing information and prefer expressing themselves through logical and rational communication. They are perpetual list makers, and these pragmatic signs feel most grounded and stable when paired with fellow earth signs Taurus and Capricorn. These earth signs also value Virgo’s analytical eye and attention to detail. Opposite sign Pisces is a terrific match for Virgo: Both of these signs love being helpful, and while Virgos lend a more practical hand for assistance around the house, Pisces is a skilled emotional healer.
When their meticulousness takes a turn for the worst, it can often manifest in perfectionism or nitpickiness. Impulsive Gemini and intrepid Sagittarius can be put off by Virgo’s neurotic tendencies, and these signs often clash when coupled. When matched with a Gemini or Sag, Virgos would benefit from embracing the spontaneity of life and not getting so caught up in the details.
Libras arethe aesthetes of the zodiac. These charming, dapper air signs enjoy connoisseurship and are often found admiring modern artwork at a gallery, sipping wine in a vineyard, or out shopping for the finest clothing. They are also one of the most epic flirts of the zodiac. Gemini and Aquarius deeply admire this Venusian sign's appreciation for art and culture and enjoy cultivating their own refined tastes within these well-matched air sign partnerships.
Libras, represented by the scales, love being in pairs, which makes Aries an interesting partner for them. Aries are known for their fierce independence, so when these two signs couple, they often create compelling counterbalances (as reflected in the infamous duo Bonnie and Clyde). Oftentimes, this sociable sign can become overly consumed with their public image. This people-pleasing sensibility may rub Cancers and Capricorns the wrong way, while Libras may become frustrated by these signs’ cold intensity. When matched with a Cancer or Capricorn, Libra should prove their dedication by paying extra attention to their lover (especially in group settings).
Scorpio is oneof the fiercest signs of the zodiac. These powerful water signs use their incredible intuition to manifest their goals and approach their passions with relentless dedication. It’s no surprise that they also make extremely dedicated lovers and they make love like their life (and your soul) depends on it. While some signs balk at Scorpio’s intensity, fellow water signs Cancer and Pisces embrace Scorpio energy.
Water signs are known for their emotional intelligence, so astrology’s like-minded sea creatures also enjoy deep-diving into their psyches with Scorpio at the helm. This sign is also recognized for its magnetic sexuality. Their sexual appetite is best satiated by its opposite sign: Taurus is considered the most sensual sign of the zodiac, so when matched with ravenous Scorpio, this couple makes for a truly erotic pairing.
Scorpio moves in the darkness, and its elaborate schemes can often appear sneaky or manipulative. Leos and Aquarians can be put off by this sign's evasive tendencies, and Scorpios can similarly scoff at these signs' inability to conceal their motives. Remember, Scorpio: Leos and Aquarians aren’t necessarily judgmental, they just don’t want to be left out. When paired with these signs, Scorpios shouldn’t be afraid to share even their most secret plans with their fire or air sign lovers — they’ll want to get in on the fun, too!Sagittarius, symbolized by the archer, is always ready for an adventure. These fire signs are natural philosophers, scholars, and explorers, recognized for their captivating storytelling and infectious humor. They tend to have epic sex drives and can even be quite the heartbreaker. They key to winning over a Sag is to let them keep their freedom. Like-minded Aries and Leo perfectly complement the Sagittarian wildfire: When these blazing signs link up, the couple benefits from a passionate, creative, and thrilling partnership. Opposite sign Gemini is also a terrific match, because both Gemini and Sagittarius believe in living life to its fullest, and these inverted signs may support each other’s journeys toward self-actualization.
Since this sign is always chasing its arrow, these archers have a reputation for being unreliable and fickle. Logical Virgos and sentimental Pisces are easily wounded by Sag’s no-bullshit approach to life. If paired with a Virgo or Pisces, Sag should make sure to treat their lover like their copilot. Include your earth or water sign in your adventures and don’t forget to apologize for any hurt feelings (yes, Sag, even if you didn’t mean to hurt them).
Ambitious Capricornswork hard to build safety and security in their lives. They aspire to create solid foundations for their careers, homes, and romantic partnerships. That being said, they are represented by the Devil Card in tarot, and play as hard as they work. They may look like business on the outside but these sea goats are kinky on the inside. Like-minded earth signs Taurus and Virgo benefit most from their focused dedication, as the determined goat provides the core stability all earth signs crave. Similarly, this sign may appreciate Taurus’s sensuality and Virgo’s organization, both of which add nuanced layers to their tenacity. Capricorn may also enjoy linking up with its opposite sign, Cancer. These signs share more traditional views on romance and like to build safe domestic environments (crabs seek solace in their shells, while goats retreat to their secluded caves).
Capricorn’s fastidious approach to life is not for everyone. Fiery Aries and agreeable Libra can become frustrated by their stoicism and Capricorn can also grow exhausted by the flippant nature of these signs. When dating an Aries or Libra, Capricorn must remember that their lovers arenottheir assistants and that the best partnerships are those built from mutual respect.
Progressive Aquariansare known for their humanitarianism. These air signs enjoy high-level thinking and are motivated by egalitarian-minded work that inspires, revolutionizes, and improves society. The water bearer's romantic downfall may be that they can pay more attention to society at large than those close to them. Like-minded air signs Gemini and Libra appreciate Aquarian energy; their big-picture visioning sets the stage for Gemini to explore and Libra to perform. Similarly, Aquarians appreciate Gemini and Libra’s more lighthearted intellectualism. When Aquarius pairs with a Leo, the air and fire combination could make a surprisingly dynamic duo. As Leo represents the king and Aquarius symbolizes the people, this couple has a comprehensive understanding of societal complexities.
At times, Aquarian idealism can become righteous. Taurus and Scorpio may feel attacked by their strict morality and Aquarians can be put off by these signs’ hedonistic tendencies. If an Aquarius partners with a Taurus or Scorpio, the air sign should work on becoming more tolerant of different world views and learn to appreciate the raw physicality of these highly sensual signs.
Otherworldly Piscesare known for their sweet dispositions, enchanting creativity, and powerful clairvoyance. This water sign (the last of the zodiac) can pick up on energies, auras, and nonverbal expression. They are very open-minded and can do well in open relationships. Like-minded sea creatures Cancers and Scorpios are great matches for them. Unlike deep-sea fish, crabs and scorpions can walk on land, so a partnership with these fellow water signs can be simultaneously emotionally rewarding and extremely grounding for oceanic Pisces. They can also create a strong partnership with its opposite sign, Virgo. Virgos and Pisces are both generous and these two signs can benefit from each other’s kindness and support.
Pisces can be easily wounded and fast-talking Gemini and Sagittarius can become frustrated by their delicate ego. Gemini and Sag, meanwhile, may inadvertently hurt their feelings, causing these gentle fishies to swim away. If partnered with a Gemini or Sag, Pisces should remember not to take things too personally and consider emulating some of these signs’ extroverted sensibilities.
Now, read more stories about astrology onAllure:This Is What You're Like in Bed, According to Your Zodiac SignWhat Your Zodiac Sign Says About Your Love Life and Approach to DatingNow You Can Find the Perfect Manicure for Your Zodiac SignNow, watch someone get tattooed for the first time:Don't forget to follow Allure onInstagramandTwitter.
More from AllureContact© 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of ourUser AgreementandPrivacy Policy and Cookie StatementandYour California Privacy Rights. If you need help purchasing a product directly from Allure,go to our FAQ.
Alluremay earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
Ad Choices.
