old id = 3818
The 11 Best Office Chairs (2022): Budget, Luxe, Cushions, and Casters | WIRED
2020
https://www.wired.com/gallery/best-office-chairs

To revisit this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
To revisit this article, select My Account, thenView saved storiesJulian ChokkattuGear TeamThe 11 Best Office ChairsThere's a goodchance you've given more thought to the mattress you sleep on than the chair you sit on. That's fine! Sleep isextremely important. But if you spend several hours—more than eight, if you're me—at your desk, it's a good idea to give the humble chair more attention. It's not just about finding a comfortable seat. The right materials can whisk away body heat, and having plenty of adjustability options can tailor the chair to your body. We've spent the past year sitting on about 20 office chairs, and these are our favorites.
Be sure to check out our other buying guides, including theBest Mattresses,Best Couch in a Box, and theBest Work-From-Home Gear.
Updated April 2022: We've added the Fully Alani to our Honorable Mentions section and Flexispot's Sit2Go chair as an option to avoid. We also added Stealtho casters, and removed the Laura Davidson Futura as it's permanently out of stock.
Special offer for Gear readers: Get a1-year Subscription toWIREDfor $5 ($25 off). This includes unlimited access toWIRED.
com and our print magazine (if you'd like). Subscriptions help fund the work we do every day.
Simon Hill, Louryn Strampe, and Medea Giordano contributed to this guide.
If you buy something using links in our stories, we may earn a commission. This helps support our journalism.
Learn more. Please also considersubscribing to WIREDBest for Most PeopleA good chair often means one that comes with a variety of adjustments. Branch's Ergonomic Chair fits this bill. It's surprisingly easy to assemble in minutes (the instructions are great), and there are tons of little tweaks you can make. You can push the armrest back and forward, up and down; the seat can extend out or be pushed all the way in; you can lock the recline; and there's even adjustable lumbar support. It does all this while managing to look very sleek and without asking an outlandish price. (There's no headrest but you can pay to add one.)It doesn't keep my back as upright as I'd like, but the double-woven nylon mesh backrest feels nice to lean against. The seat is made of high-density foam—it's firm yet comfy—and it doesn't trap heat as much as other foam seats I've tried. It's a great chair for a variety of body sizes; my 6'4" self enjoyed sitting on it, as did my 5'1" partner. Fair warning though: Pet hair tends to cling to the upholstery, and we've noticed the fabric on the front end of the seat tends to pill quite quickly.
Best Budget ChairAsk WIRED reviews director Jeffrey Van Camp what the best office chair is and he'll point you to the humble Hyken. It's frequently available for just $170 during big sale events, making it one of the most affordable good options out there. It reclines, has a breathable mesh fabric on the back and seat, and it's sturdy. You even get a headrest and lumbar support. After three years of continuous sitting, Van Camp says the mesh has compressed a bit, but it's still comfy. However, it may not be the best option if you need a wider seat.
Great for AirflowNo one wants a swampy butt. There, I said it. Thick foam seats often trap your body heat, especially during the summer months. That's why I like the X-Chair. It doesn't just have a mesh backrest, but the seat is mesh too, allowing for excellent airflow. It also feels like you're sitting on a hammock. Who doesn't want that? Every part of my body feels well supported, and you can adjust nearly everything on the chair. Pull the seat up and push the armrests up, down, and side to side, or angle them in or out. The lumbar support feels like a cushion, and it adjusts as you move in your seat.
If you want to rest your head, you can pay extra for the headrest. Speaking of which, X-Chair has a number of models to choose from. I tested the X-2 K-Sport with the wide seat, and it fit my 6'4" frame really well. But it was too wide for my partner, who is 5'1". Most people should be fine with the standard X1. The only things I dislike? X-Chair offers up various cooling, heating, and massage attachments, but I didn't find them all that helpful. The chair is also very expensive.
A Familiar Alternative:TheMavix M7 ($778)looks strangely similar to the X-Chair, and that's because both are owned by the same company. I ran into some issues with assembly, but customer service was able to exchange the model without much effort. The M7 has similarly adjustable armrests and seat angles, but you get wheels that lock. The mesh back and wide seat construction keep you cool and comfortable during a sweaty session ofLeague of Legends, and the lumbar support makes me feel like I'm in good hands. If you're short, contact customer support while ordering—Mavix offers shorter cylinders so your feet touch the ground.
Best UpgradeSteelcase's Gesture is comfortable, no matter how you're sitting. Tuck one leg under the other, cross your legs at the knee, or sling one over the armrest, and you'll be fairly well-supported. The adjustments also have a wide range, so you can precisely tailor the whole package to your body and posture. Unfortunately, it isn't as breathable as other cheaper chairs, and the upholstered fabric hasn't held up as well as other pricey chairs like the Herman Miller Embody (see below). That said, there are several different fabrics you can choose from, and Steelcase also has one of the best warranties around (12 years).
We initially had this chair as an alternative to the Embody, but the Herman Miller chair has exploded in price since we tested it. The Gesture costs much less but comes very, very close.
Best for Recliners (and Eco-Friendly)When I leaned back in the Humanscale Freedom Headrest—which we wrote about more than20yearsago—I felt bliss. Designed by the famed Niels Diffrient, this chair gracefully supports my back like a mother gently laying a baby in a crib. If you're a recliner, this is the chair for you. By design, there aren't as many adjustments you can make compared to other spendy chairs; the idea is that the chair will adapt to your own body. For example, there's no way to lock the chair so it won't recline, but it never reclined when I didn't want it to. Youcanadjust the lumbar support, seat height, armrest height, and seat depth—I often had to readjust the headrest, as it tends to slide down—but otherwise, this chair pretty much lets you set it and forget it. It even comes fully assembled. Did I mention the 15-year warranty? The armrests are just about the only part I don't like as much—it's easy to adjust them accidentally when you shift in the seat.
If you don't care for the headrest, there's a versionwithout it that's a little cheaper. And sustainably, this is a net positive product, meaning the company does more good than bad by making one of these chairs. For instance, Humanscale has rainwater capture systems in its manufacturing sites and uses this for all final assembly. This ratingis certifiedby theInternational Living Future Institute, anonprofitorganization.
A Luxury PickIt might take you a week or two (maybe even a month) to get used to the Herman Miller Embody, but it's well worth it. Its upright positioning supported my back and eased lingering back pain from sitting in a cheap gaming chair. The seat feels rigid at first but eventually becomes surprisingly pillowy, and the armrests stay firmly in place. It does a great job of whisking heat away from my body, though notaswell as mesh backrests and seats. It's one of the most adjustable chairs around: You can pull out the seat, change the height and angle of the armrests, and tweak theBackfit adjustmentto follow your spine's natural curve.
Did I mention it's pretty? I'd argue this is one of the most eye-catching chairs around, especially with the rib-like design on the back. Not to mention it has a surprisingly small footprint. I know, I know, it's incredibly spendy—in fact, I bought it for roughly $1,465 back in 2020 and the price has skyrocketed since. But what's amazing is that after two years in this chair, it feels just as good as new with barely any squeaks. Best of all, Herman Miller offers a 12-year warranty that covers every part of the chair, and it arrives completely assembled.
Great for Easing Back PainYou might be wondering why the best “chair” for your back is a stool with no backrest. Well, that's because the QOR360 targets the sitz bones in your pelvis to ensure you're sitting upright. The base of the stool rocks around slightly so your body will continually shift a little throughout the day, but most importantly, it made me want to get up and move. That might sound like a bad thing, but movement is one of the best ways to counter the woes of sitting in a chair all day.
You should definitely follow the company's instructions and ease into it. I started with 30 minutes a day because sitting on it for any longer just left me really sore. After a week of gradually increasing the length of time, my back pain started to disappear, and I felt my posture improve whenever I left the house.
Best Under $100I bought this chair when I started working from home and needed something cheap. I didn't expect to like it so much, considering the price. This isn't a $1,500 ultra-ergonomic chaise lounge, but it is surprisingly comfortable, even after hours and hours of sitting. The mesh back is breathable, the casters are smooth, and the armrests don't feel too obstructive. Amazon has since updated the model slightly, so your mileage may vary. Luckily returns are free, in case your experience differs.
Best Gaming ChairGaming chairs mostly go after a particular racing car aesthetic. Most of the chairs above will work better, but if you're after this specific design, theSecretlab Titan Evois classy enough for the home office. Where it sets itself apart from similarly priced competitors is in durability and flexibility. It’s comfortable for marathon gaming sessions, and that's thanks to the amount of adjustability it offers (particularly the lumbar support). The headrest pillow is magnetic and stays attached to the chair, which is a nice touch. But the firm cold cure foam molds to your body and may not suit everyone. This material also doesn't deal well with heat—it can get very warm in the lower back area.
Best for Cross-Legged SittersHave a problem sitting normally? If your legs need to be bent and twisted for you to be comfortable, you'll want to check out the Pipersong. It has a 360-degree swiveling footstool that can accommodate pretty much any sitting position you want. I can go from kneeling to cross-legged to one leg up, one leg down. It’s possible to sit regularly too, with the footstool behind you and your feet flat on the floor. It's the only chair I've found that's designed for odd sitting habits.
There are no armrests, which I didn’t mind because that’s what makes it possible to sit in many of these positions. The actual stool and chair back could stand to be bigger and taller, respectively. I had to use a pillow to keep my back comfy, and anyone with a larger hip-to-butt ratio may not get the support needed to sit all day.
Buy It UsedThere's a reason the classic Aeron is the chair of choice in many offices: It's durable, supportive, and airy. It comes in three sizes—A, B, and C—and you're able to adjust pretty much everything on the chair to suit your body. That includes the arms, the seat depth, and the lumbar support. That said, we don't recommend splurging on a brand-new Aeron. There's averygood chance you can find one for significantly less at a local furniture reseller, on eBay, or on Facebook Marketplace. Or you can luck out like WIRED senior editor Michael Calore, who walked away with a free Aeron after an office in his town closed up shop.
Read our guide onbuying used gear on eBayto make sure you don't overpay.
Honorable MentionsNot every chair is a winner. Here are a few others we like enough to recommend, but they're not as good as our top picks above.
Fully Alani for $379:The Alani, from the maker ofour favorite standing desk, comes in a few color combos that blend neatly into any home office. There’s a nice contoured cushion on the base and a mesh back to keep you cool, plus lumbar support for good posture. You can adjust the height, seat depth, armrests, and recline tension, and lock the recline. I found it comfy for long days of up to 16 hours. It worked for my 6'1" self, and my 5' daughter also liked it. It’s a solid alternative to the Branch Ergonomic Chair (our top pick), but it's a smidge more expensive.
Ikea Markus for $249:The Markus is a perfectly fine office chair. It's not the most comfortable, but it's far from the worst. The mesh design keeps you cool, and the tall back lets you fully lean into it. It’s rather thin and isn’t obtrusive in a small home office or bedroom. It was annoying to put together—you might need someone to hold up the back of the chair while you properly attach the seat. Unfortunately, if you often sit with at least one leg up or crisscrossed, the width between the arms will make you uncomfortable.
Seat Cushions and BackrestsIf you can't upgrade your chair just yet, a cushion or backrest might help. Here are a few we like:CushionLab Seat Cushion for $72:This memory foam seat is very comfortable, and I had no problems sitting on it for hours on end. It's best paired with an adjustable chair, as it adds a decent amount of height to your seat, which might make typing on a keyboard awkward. It does a great job of keeping out bad odors, and you can also wash the cover.
LoveHome Memory Foam Lumbar Support for $30:If you slouch in your seat, this comfortable memory foam pillow can help. It keeps your back straight and supported, and as it's very affordable, it's a great option to try before shelling out hundreds for a new chair. It's good to use in a car or a wheelchair, too. The cover is washable, and it has two adjustable straps (plus an extension strap) that go around your seat to keep it in the position you need.
Replace Your CastersThe wheels on the bottom of your chair are among the easiest parts to replace. If your current casters don't roll smoothly or are too loud, it might be worth replacing them instead of buying a whole new chair. I like these from Stealtho, a Ukrainian company. They'll work with nearly every office chair, though the company notes they don't work with Ikea chairs. The soft polyurethane material means these won't scratch or chip hardwood floors, as some plastic casters do, plus it'll feel like you're silently gliding as you roll from your desk to the fridge (don't judge).
Fair warning: Since these are more frictionless than normal casters, theycanroll around sometimes, like when you get up and walk away from the chair. Stealtho has locking casters if you're worried, and theydon't cost much more.
Avoid These ChairsIf you come across these chairs, we recommend you save your cash and go for one of the picks above.
Steelcase Series 1 for $394:I wanted to like the Series 1, especially after having such a good experience with theGesture. My biggest issue is with the armrest—the tops slide back and forth and side to side, which could be a good thing, except I managed to pinch my arm every time I moved. There's no way to lock them in place, so while my trunk felt supported, my arms weren't. The seat is also pretty curved, which can feel like you're trapped in one position as you work throughout the day.
FlexiSpot Sit2Go 2-in-1 Fitness Chair for $350:This seems like a good idea since it lets you get some exercise while sitting at a desk. I felt virtuous pedaling away while checking my email. The problem is it’s just not very comfortable. (I could not sit on it all day.) It also just feels like a cheap low-resistance exercise bike, so you’re getting the worst of both worlds. You also need a standing desk to accommodate it.
Poppin Task Chair for $350:This is as simple as office chairs come. There aren't many parts of it you can adjust, but the back does an OK job of aligning with the spine. The upholstered seat is fine in terms of comfort, but the mesh material on the backrest makes it breathable. Unfortunately, the casters don't roll smoothly and are pretty loud. It's also puzzling why the Poppin costs as much as it does when you get so much more with our top pick that's a little cheaper.
Flexispot Soutien for $300:The thick foam padding is very poor at managing heat, so youwillfeel sweaty in this chair over time. The mesh backrest helps a bit, and it's reasonably plushy and comfortable. It feels unnecessarily large though, and the lumbar support slides around too easily when you move.
Teknion Around Chair for $675:I'm still struggling to seewhythis chair costs as much as it does. It feels incredibly similar to the Poppin Task Chair above (which is almost half the price), but the casters on the Teknion are even worse. They're annoyingly loud and feel cheap.
Tips on Sitting ProperlyIt's not just about finding a chair you like. We've rounded up several tips onhow to set up your desk properly here, but here are a few highlights.
Sitting for too long in a day is not good for your health—no matter what chair you use. It increases the risk oftype 2 diabetes, stroke, and heart disease. The best thing you can do is get up and move every half hour. If you can, a 40-min walk per day,according to a recent study, can make a big difference in countering some effects of a sedentary lifestyle. Our recommendation? Trya smartwatch. Most have movement reminders that encourage you to stretch your legs. If you're dealing with back pain, your first step is to consult your physician.
Make sure your chair's armrests are adjustable.
Your palms should be elevated over your desk and your wrists should be straight. If the bottom of your palm is resting on the desk or wrist rest, there's a chance you're putting too much pressure on your nerves, which could lead to issues like carpal tunnel syndrome. Talk to your physician if you're feeling any kind of pain. A gaming mouse, often more ergonomic than standard mice,might be helpful; just make sure to find one thatfits your palm size.
When you look forward, your eyes should align with the top of your monitor or laptop.
That might mean making sure you find a chair that can adjust up and down, elevating your laptopwith a stand, or raising the height of your monitor. This puts less pressure on your neck and spine—you shouldn't be craning your neck up or down.
WIRED COUPONSExtra savings up to $15 with TurboTax discountH&R Block Promotion: Free online tax filingShop shoes on sale for under $100 from Finish LineExtra 20% off sitewide - Dyson promo code 2022GoPro Hot Deal: $150 off the new HERO10 Black BonesSamsung coupon - 45% off select items + free shippingMore From WIREDContact© 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of ourUser AgreementandPrivacy Policy and Cookie StatementandYour California Privacy Rights.
Wiredmay earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
Ad Choices
