old id = 4085
10 Breakthrough Technologies 2021 | MIT Technology Review
2020
https://www.technologyreview.com/2021/02/24/1014369/10-breakthrough-technologies-2021

10 Breakthrough Technologies 2021This list marks 20 years since we began compiling an annual selection of the year’s most important technologies. Some, such as mRNA vaccines, are already changing our lives, while others are still a few years off. Below, you’ll find a brief description along with a link to a feature article that probes each technology in detail. We hope you’ll enjoy and explore—taken together, we believe this list represents a glimpse into ourcollective future.
Messenger RNA vaccinesWe got very lucky. The two most effective vaccines against the coronavirus are based on messenger RNA, a technology that has been in the works for 20 years. When the covid-19 pandemic began last January, scientists at several biotech companies were quick to turn to mRNA as a way to create potential vaccines; in late December 2020, at a time when more than 1.5 million had died from covid-19 worldwide, the vaccines were approved in the US, marking the beginning of the end of the pandemic.
The new covid vaccines are based on a technology never before used in therapeutics, and it could transform medicine, leading to vaccines against various infectious diseases, including malaria. And if this coronavirus keeps mutating, mRNA vaccines can be easily and quickly modified. Messenger RNA also holds great promise as the basis for cheap gene fixes to sickle-cell disease and HIV. Also in the works: using mRNA to help the body fight off cancers.
Antonio Regalado explains the history and medical potential of the exciting newscience of messenger RNA.
GPT-3Large natural-language computer models that learn to write and speak are a big step toward AI that can better understand and interact with the world.
GPT-3is by far the largest—and most literate—to date. Trained on the text of thousands of books and most of the internet, GPT-3 canmimic human-written textwith uncanny—and at times bizarre—realism, making it the most impressive language model yet produced using machine learning.
But GPT-3doesn’t understand what it’s writing, so sometimes the results are garbled and nonsensical. It takes an enormous amount of computation power, data, and money to train, creating a large carbon footprint and restricting the development of similar models to those labs with extraordinary resources. And since it is trained on text from the internet, which is filled with misinformation and prejudice, it often produces similarly biased passages.
Will Douglas Heaven shows off a sample ofGPT-3’s clever writingand explains why some are ambivalent about its achievements.
TikTok recommendation algorithmsSince its launch in China in 2016, TikTok has become one of the world’s fastest-growing social networks. It’s been downloaded billions of times and attracted hundreds of millions of users. Why? Because the algorithms that power TikTok’s “For You” feed have changed the way peoplebecome famous online.
While other platforms are geared more toward highlighting content with mass appeal, TikTok’s algorithms seem just as likely to pluck a new creator out of obscurity as they are to feature a known star. And they’re particularly adept at feeding relevant content to niche communities of users who share a particular interest or identity.
The ability of new creators to get a lot of views very quickly—and the ease with which users can discover so many kinds of content—have contributed to the app’s stunning growth. Other social media companies are now scrambling to reproduce these features on their own apps.
Abby Ohlheiser profiles aTikTok creatorwho was surprised by her own success on the platform.
Lithium-metal batteriesElectric vehicles come with a tough sales pitch; they’re relatively expensive, and you can drive them only a few hundred miles before they need to recharge—which takes far longer than stopping for gas. All these drawbacks have to do with the limitations of lithium-ion batteries. A well-funded Silicon Valley startup now says it has a battery that will make electric vehicles far more palatable for the mass consumer.
It’s called alithium-metal batteryand is being developed by QuantumScape. According to early test results, the battery could boost the range of an EV by 80% and can be rapidly recharged. The startup has a deal with VW, which says it will be selling EVs with the new type of battery by 2025.
The battery is still just a prototype that’s much smaller than one needed for a car. But if QuantumScape and others working on lithium-metal batteries succeed, it could finally make EVs attractive to millions of consumers.
James Temple describes how alithium-metal battery works, and why scientists are so excited by recent results.
Data trustsTechnology companies have proven to be poor stewards of our personal data. Our information has been leaked, hacked, and sold and resold more times than most of us can count. Maybe the problem isn’t with us, but with the model of privacy to which we’ve long adhered—one in which we, as individuals, are primarily responsible for managing and protecting our own privacy.
Data trustsoffer one alternative approach that some governments are starting to explore. A data trust is a legal entity that collects and manages people’s personal data on their behalf. Though the structure and function of these trusts are still being defined, and many questions remain, data trusts are notable for offering a potential solution to long-standing problems in privacy and security.
Anouk Ruhaak describes thepowerful potential of this modeland a few early examples that show its promise.
Green hydrogenRelated StoryHydrogen has always been an intriguing possible replacement for fossil fuels. It burns cleanly, emitting no carbon dioxide; it’s energy dense, so it’s a good way to store power from on-and-off renewable sources; and you can make liquid synthetic fuels that are drop-in replacements for gasoline or diesel. But most hydrogen up to now has been made from natural gas; the process is dirty and energy intensive.
The rapidly dropping cost of solar and wind power meansgreen hydrogenis now cheap enough to be practical. Simply zap water with electricity, and presto, you’ve got hydrogen. Europe is leading the way, beginning to build the needed infrastructure.
Peter Fairley argues that such projects are just a first step to an envisioned global network of electrolysis plants that run on solar and wind power, churning outclean hydrogen.
Digital contact tracingAs the coronavirus began to spread around the world, it felt at first as ifdigital contact tracing might help us. Smartphone apps could use GPS or Bluetooth to create a log of people who had recently crossed paths. If one of them later tested positive for covid, that person could enter the result into the app, and it would alert others who might have been exposed.
But digital contact tracing largely failed to make much impact on the virus’s spread. Apple and Google quickly pushed out features likeexposure notificationsto many smartphones, but public health officialsstruggledto persuade residents to use them. The lessons we learn fromthis pandemiccould not only help us prepare for the next pandemic but also carry over to other areas of health care.
Lindsay Muscato explores whydigital contact tracingfailed to slow covid-19 and offers ways we can do better next time.
Hyper-accurate positioningWe all use GPS every day; it has transformed our lives and many of our businesses. But while today’s GPS is accurate to within 5 to 10 meters, new hyper-accurate positioning technologies have accuracies within a few centimeters or millimeters. That’s opening up new possibilities, from landslide warnings to delivery robots and self-driving cars that can safely navigate streets.
China’sBeiDou(Big Dipper) global navigation system was completed in June 2020 and is part of what’s making all this possible. It provides positioning accuracy of 1.5 to two meters to anyone in the world. Using ground-based augmentation, it can get down to millimeter-level accuracy. Meanwhile, GPS, which has been around since the early 1990s, is getting an upgrade: four new satellites forGPS IIIlaunched in November and more are expected in orbit by 2023.
Ling Xin reports on how thegreatly increased accuracyof these systems is already proving useful.
Remote everythingThe covid pandemic forced the world to go remote. Getting that shift right has been especially critical inhealth careand education. Some places around the world have done a particularly good job at getting remote services in these two areas to work well for people.
Snapask, an online tutoring company, has more than 3.5 million users in nine Asian countries, and Byju’s, a learning app based in India, has seen the number of its users soar to nearly 70 million. Unfortunately, students in many other countries arestill flounderingwith their online classes.
Meanwhile, telehealth efforts in Uganda and several other African countries have extended health care to millions during the pandemic. In a part of the world with a chronic lack of doctors, remote health care has been a life saver.
Sandy Ong reports on the remarkable success ofonline learning in Asiaand the spread of telemedicine in Africa.
Multi-skilled AIDespite the immense progress in artificial intelligence in recent years, AI and robots are still dumb in many ways, especially when it comes to solving new problems or navigating unfamiliar environments. They lack the human ability, found even in young children, to learn how the world works and apply that general knowledge to new situations.
One promising approach to improving the skills of AI is to expand its senses; currently AI withcomputer vision or audio recognitioncan sense things but cannot “talk” about what it sees and hears using natural-language algorithms. But what if you combined these abilities in a single AI system? Might these systems begin to gainhuman-like intelligence? Might a robot that can see, feel, hear, and communicate be a more productive human assistant?Karen Hao explains howAIs with multiple senseswill gain a greater understanding of the world around them, achieving a much more flexible intelligence.
For a look at what technologies made our 10 Breakthrough Technologies lists in previous years,check out this page, which starts with 2020's list.
10 Breakthrough Technologies 2021bythe EditorsShareThis story was part of our March/April 2021 issue.
Keep ReadingMost PopularWhy China is still obsessed with disinfecting everythingMost public health bodies dealing with covid have long since moved on from the idea of surface transmission. China’s didn’t—and that helps it control the narrative about the disease’s origins and danger.
These materials were meant to revolutionize the solar industry. Why hasn’t it happened?Perovskites are promising, but real-world conditions have held them back.
Anti-aging drugs are being tested as a way to treat covidDrugs that rejuvenate our immune systems and make us biologically younger could help protect us from the disease’s worst effects.
A quick guide to the most important AI law you’ve never heard ofThe European Union is planning new legislation aimed at curbing the worst harms associated with artificial intelligence.
Stay connectedGet the latest updates fromMIT Technology ReviewDiscover special offers, top stories, upcoming events, and more.
Thank you for submitting your email!It looks like something went wrong.
We’re having trouble saving your preferences. Try refreshing this page and updating them one more time. If you continue to get this message, reach out to us atcustomer-service@technologyreview.comwith a list of newsletters you’d like to receive.
MIT Technology ReviewOur in-depth reporting reveals what’s going on now to prepare you for what’s coming next.
Subscribeto support our journalism.
AboutHelp© 2022 MIT Technology Review
