old id = 4276
Home - Endorse Project
2020
http://www.endorse-project.eu

Safe, Efficient and IntegratedIndoor Robotic Fleetfor Logistic Applicationsin Healthcare and Commercial SpacesENDORSE PROJECTENDORSE is aEuropean funded Horizon 2020-MSCA-RISEProject. The overall objective of ENDORSE is todevelop and validate a safe, efficient and integrated indoor robotic fleet for logistic applications in healthcare and commercial spaces.
There is now significant evidence that commercial indoor spaces such as hospitals, hotels, offices offer great potential for commercial exploitation of logistic robotics. Also, offer advantages for their deployment, since they are required by law to meet stringent building codes, and therefore the navigation space exhibits some structure. In addition, they offer reliable communications infrastructure, since this is required for normal business operation. Thus, commercial spaces are rightfully considered the next great field of logistic robotics deployment. Despite these advantages, today, few solutions exist, and these solutions do not trigger widespread acceptance by the market. This is because existing systems require costly infrastructure installation (arrays of peripheral sensors, mapping, etc.); they do not easily integrate to corporate IT solutions and as a result, they do not fully automate procedures and traceability; they are limited to a single type of service, i.e. transfer of goods.
Through transfer of knowledge, multidisciplinary research and cross-fertilization between academia and industry, ENDORSE will address the aforementioned technical hurdles.
Four innovation pillars willbe pursued:(i) infrastructure-less multi-robot navigation, i.e. minimum (if any) installation of sensors and communications buses inside the building for the localization of robots, targets and docking stations;(ii) advanced HRI for resolving deadlocks and achieving efficient sharing of space resources in crowded spaces;(iii) deployment of the ENDORSE software as a cloud-based service facilitating its integration with corporate software solutions such as ERP, CRM, etc.;(iv) reconfigurable and modular hardware architectures so that diverse modules can be easily swapped. The latter will be demonstrated and validated by the integration of an e-diagnostic support module (equipped with non-invasive sensors/devices) and the Electronic Health Records (EHR) interfacing, which will serve as an e-diagnostic mobile station.
NewsENDORSE project is cited inNature OutlookJanuary 2022Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions Staff ExchangesApply by 9th MarchFace to Face MID-TERM REVIEW (MTR) meeting in Valencia25 - 26 February 2020Robotnik & UPV, Valencia, SpainFace to Face Meeting in Nicosia3 - 4 October 2019UCY & CITARD, Nicosia, CyprusEventsHorizon 2020 MSCA cluster event “Artificial Intelligence”, 10-11 December 2019, BrusselsThe Marie Sklodowska-Curie Action (MSCA) units of the Research Executive Agency (REA) are joining forces to organise a project cluster event to showcase the contribution of MSCA projects to artificial intelligence (AI).
Paris Healthcare Week 2019Innovative Healthcare Technologies International Exhibition. The Paris Healthcare Week is the French-speaking countries leading event dedicated to equipment, solutions and strategies to manage and transform healthcare facilities.
Jetsan 2019 : Journées D’Etude Sur La TéléSanté23 - 24 May 2019 at Sorbonne Université, Paris campus JussieuPartnersHORIZON 2020This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 MSCA RISE Action under grant agreement No. 823887.
PRIVACY POLICYENDORSE consortium is committed to maintaining robust privacy protections for its users. Our Privacy Policy is designed to help you understand how we collect, use and safeguard the information you provide to us and to assist you in making informed decisions when using our Service.
