old id = 440
Condé Nast - Careers
2020
http://www.condenast.com/careers

CONNECT WITH USJoin Us NowExplore OpportunitiesLife at Condé NastAt Condé Nast, you will have the opportunity to work with our team of award-winning journalists, editors and designers, industry icons and the best engineers and developers, who together, create and deliver the premium content that is the hallmark of our world-class brands.
We take pride in our forward-thinking dynamic culture that champions diversity and inclusivity, and fosters a respectful working environment.
At the fingertips of every employee are innovative technological tools and access to programs that support professional and personal growth.
At Condé Nast we are a community.
Workplace ValuesOur vision for our workplace is one that is centered on transparency and respect and with values that bring forward the best in all of us each and every day. We are committed to creating a culture in which diverse voices and perspectives are encouraged and respected, and where all employees are equally supported in developing their careers — where people can truly be themselves and feel they can achieve their best.
Our culture is one of our top priorities and we are focused on implementing people-first policies and programs equitably throughout our global organization. In the past year, we’ve already made significant progress––this includes improving and extending our family leave benefits; stopping the use of traditional NDA agreements in areas related to harassment and nondiscrimination; and making sure that many team members previously classified as contractors were given the opportunity to move into full-time employee positions.
As we continue to invest in systems, tools and processes to strengthen our company, what’s most important is the continued investment in our people.
Compensation and Benefits (for U.S. employees only)Over the last year, we’ve expanded our benefits offerings and continue to evaluate them to identify opportunities to best support everyone. A few recent enhancements include:Creating fair and consistent compensation systems and processes is our priority. To best capture the comprehensive way we are looking at our compensation, as well as provide an update to the commitments we’ve made to improve our systems, we are building new systems and job architecture which includes job leveling, ongoing pay equity analysis, ongoing peer-to-peer analysis and more. In the U.S., while we’ve completed an initial review of our compensation structures, we decided to go a few steps further than most companies and complete additional analysis to ensure we get it right.
Diversity & InclusionWe continue to work to deliverour global diversity and inclusion commitmentsand there are a number ofkey initiativeswhere we are making progress.
Diversity Data CollectionAs we assess our diversity and inclusion policies and processes to determine where we need to focus our efforts, we have asked U.S. employees to update and provide diversity data about themselves voluntarily. We plan to use this data to strengthen our recruitment, progression and retention efforts around the globe.
Employee Resource Groups (ERGs)Employee Resource Groupsplay an important part in building an inclusive culture that celebrates our employees diversity. Currently, there are five ERGs in the U.S.: The Women’s Network, Pride (LGBTQ+), ACN (Asian American), Conexión (Hispanic/LatinX) and NOIR (Black).
Inclusion TrainingMandatory inclusion training program was launched in 2020 in the U.S. and has now been delivered to all of our markets around the globe.
2020 Global D&I ReportOur inaugural D&I Reportwas released last year to best capture our efforts through the first part of 2020. It will be updated with our entire year’s D&I achievements and will include many insights from our global markets.
Career DevelopmentFor markets without an established practice in place, we are launching new review and goal-setting processes so that employees and their managers have open, honest and constructive conversations throughout the year. Goal setting is an essential organizational practice to align business and career goals together withThe Condé Code.
MentorshipOur pilot program had more than 230 participants across our content teams and we will be further expanding mentorship opportunities, including a program partnership with the Estée Lauder Companies.
LearningWe are excited to launch a global eLearning platform soon, providing world-class professional learning resources for all employees. The eLearning platform will consist of a wide variety of learning content related to relevant leadership, management, and professional skills that will complement our expanding portfolio of instructor led programs.
Employee EngagementWe listen to our employees and measure engagement on a regular basis. Findings from the surveys are used to evolve our culture and help create a workplace where employees can feel invested.
Our OfficesCondé Nast is headquartered in New York and London.
New YorkCondé Nast’s New York HQ is located in the iconic One World Trade Center, a LEED certified building. Covering several floors, the modern space was designed to offer employees a high-performance, fluid working environment. The space includes a digital studio, café and reference library, test kitchens, and a multifunctional conference center. The office offers stunning views of New York City, including the Statue of Liberty.
LondonThe airy, beautifully-designed Condé Nast London HQ is located in the Grade-II listed Adelphi Building by London’s Strand and five minutes from Charing Cross Station, a major London transport hub. Designed to support agile digital working, the open-plan, contemporary space offers hot desking, state-of-the-art equipment and informal meeting areas for easy interaction and collaboration. The office also has a Quiet Lounge, individual Think Pods, a library, a café area and expansive views of the Thames.
The Condé Nast offices in New York, San Francisco and London participate in robust recycling and composting programs. This includes the use of single-stream recycling, which helps increase the quantity of recovered material, and pre- and post-consumer composting programs that collect organic waste and reduce food waste.
Global Employee CouncilBorn from an internal call-to-action, Condé Nast’s Global Employee Council provides a platform for employees to identify shared objectives, exchange ideas, and work on community priorities for our global workforce. The Council members are trained annually to recognize best practices and share resources in support of ourCondé Code, specifically sustainability, diversity, and inclusion. They work closely with an executive steering committee composed of senior leaders from across the business to help expand our corporate social impact. The steering committee is co-chaired by Yashica Olden, Chief Diversity & Inclusion Officer, and Alice Pilia, Senior Policy Adviser.
Employee Resource GroupsIn 2021, our Employee Resource Groups (ERGs) expanded globally. ERGs are employee-led networks of volunteers who share common cultures, identities, and interests that represent the rich, diverse voices and perspectives at Condé Nast. They are designed to build community, contribute to professional growth, and foster a diverse and inclusive culture where all feel welcome and celebrated. Our ERGs host internal programming including heritage history and cultural celebrations, career development programs, while offering unique representations and expertise.
ERGs are employee-led networks of volunteers who share common cultures, identities and interests that represent the rich, diverse voices and perspectives at Condé Nast. They are designed to build community, contribute to professional growth, and foster a diverse and inclusive culture where all feel welcome and celebrated.
Our ERGs host internal programming, such as Condé Conversations, and offer unique expertise on cultures, identities and representation. These employee volunteers work with leaders across the organization to raise the visibility of underrepresented groups in content development, policies, benefits and recruitment/on-boarding to create a more inclusive Condé Nast community.
FAQsHow do I apply for a position at Condé Nast?To browse current vacancies in the U.S. pleaseclick here. For vacancies in our U.K. HQ,click here. Our systems are updated frequently, so check back regularly for the latest postings.
What should I expect during the recruitment and interview process?This process allows us to get to know you, and gives you the chance to learn more about us. During an interview, we will ask you about your skills and experience, and evaluate this information against our current business needs. You will also have an opportunity to ask us any questions you may have.
What should I wear to my interview?There is no set dress code, so please wear whatever you feel comfortable in.
I have applied for a job but haven’t heard back yet. What can I do?After applying, you will receive an email confirming receipt of your application. However, due to the high level of applications we receive, it is not always possible for us to respond to each applicant individually. A recruiter will contact you if your skills and experience are a match for the role.
Agencies: Condé Nast does not accept speculative CVs from recruitment agencies not part of our preferred supplier list, nor will Condé Nast pay agency fees for unsolicited candidates. We work with a predetermined list of preferred suppliers who must be invited by Condé Nast's recruitment team to submit candidates through our recruitment portal or in writing. We will only pay agency fees in accordance with the terms of a signed agreement in place between Condé Nast and the relevant supplier.
View our California Personnel Privacy noticehere.
Condé Nast is an equal opportunity employer. We evaluate qualified applicants without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability, veteran status, age, familial status and other legally protected characteristics.
Conde Nast is committed to working with and providing reasonable accommodations to individuals with disabilities. If you need a reasonable accommodation because of a disability for any part of the employment process, please send an e-mail to talentacquisition@condenast.com and let us know the nature of your request and your contact information. Please note, if your request is not for this stated purpose, you will not receive a response to your email.
US Notices:EEO is the lawandPay Transparency.
Condé Nast New York HQ1 World Trade Center,New York, NY 10007, USAOpen in mapsCondé Nast London HQThe Adelphi, 1-11 John Adam StreetLondon, WC2N 6HT, United KingdomOpen in mapsCopyright 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved.
