old id = 4891
Annual Reviews
2020
http://www.annualreviews.org

Connect With Our ExpertsWhat topic do you want to explore today?TheSubscribe to Openmodel is in perfect alignment with the objectives of OA2020, offering institutions and publishers a swift, fair and sustainable path to transitioning paywalled journals to open access.
Colleen CampbellOpen Access 2020 InitiativeAnnual Review of Developmental PsychologyTheAnnual Review of Developmental Psychologyprovides a developmental perspective that enriches the understanding of every aspect of psychological functioning, from cognitive to social to biological to educational.
It is surely a coming of age for the field that it is now covered by Annual Reviews, a not-for-profit organization that has been providing the scientific community with authoritative, critical reviews of the most important scholarly advances since 1932.
Andrew Lo and Robert MertonEditors, Vol. 1Annual Review of Financial Economics, 2009Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous SystemsTheAnnual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systemsprovides comprehensive reviews of significant theoretical and applied developments that impact the engineering of autonomous and semiautonomous systems. The broad fields of control and robotics are the major areas covered, together with connections to theoretical and applied mechanics, optimization, communication, information theory, machine learning, computing, and signal processing. The journal will cover important intersections with fields outside of engineering, including biology, neuroscience, and human behavioral sciences.
What is known? What isn’t known?Knowable Magazine, the new digital magazine from Annual Reviews, reports on the current state of play across a wide variety of fields and topics.
Knowable Magazineexplores the real-world significance of scholarly research, punctuated with forays into wonder and awe.
Eva EmersonEditor,Knowable MagazineAnnual Review of CriminologyTheAnnual Review of Criminologyprovides comprehensive reviews of significant developments in the multidisciplinary field of criminology, defined as the study of both the nature of criminal behavior and societal reactions to crime.
We hope that these reviews foster communication not only among the disciplines that carry out research on issues of environment, energy, and resources, but also with the managers, policymakers, and public who must depend on such information to assist decision making.
Ashok Gadgil and Diana LivermanEditors, Vol. 39Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 2014Annual Review of Biomedical Data ScienceTheAnnual Review of Biomedical Data Scienceprovides comprehensive reviews in biomedical data science, focusing on advanced methods to store, retrieve, analyze, and organize biomedical data and knowledge. The scope of the journal encompasses informatics, computational, and statistical approaches to biomedical data, including the sub-fields of bioinformatics, computational biology, biomedical informatics, clinical and clinical research informatics, biostatistics, and imaging informatics. The mission of the journal will be to identify both emerging and established areas of biomedical data science, and the leaders in these fields.
The journal is also aimed at nonscientist readers who are professionally charged with making sense of changing environmental issues—for example, journalists, congressional and agency staff, and international organization analysts. These authoritative, up-to-date reviews provide key background information at the intersections of science and policy.
Ashok Gadgil and Thomas P. TomichEditors, Vol. 41Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 2016Annual Reviews is a nonprofit publisher dedicated to synthesizing and integrating knowledge for the progress of science and the benefit of society.
News UpdatesSubscribe to Open (S2O) Announcement51 academic journals will be converted under our new modelLast year alone, Annual Reviews published 1,200 articles. “Each article is a treasure trove of knowledge that captures the current understanding of a topic and helps map out the future of science,” said Annual Reviews President and Editor-in-Chief Richard Gallagher. “By making them available to all academics and students, wherever they live and work, and also to a broader audience of policy makers and activists, corporations and workers, doctors and patients, we can contribute to more rapid and inclusive societal progress based on research.”Read More>>New Collection | Climate Change: Freshwater and Marine ImpactDownload Now!Annual Reviews has curated this new review article collection that broadly explores climate change’s impact on our natural environment, particularly focusing on freshwater and marine ecosystems. The reviews span multiple fields of study including meteorology, oceanography, and geography, and explore public health, climate engineering, and resource management. The Climate Change: Freshwater and Marine Impact collection of 21 review articles from 6 Annual Reviews journals is freely available to download and share with colleagues and students.
Download the collection>>Statement on Business with RussiaIn response to the attack on Ukraine, Annual Reviews has discontinued all business with Russia and Belarus until further notice. We are not pursuing contract renewals or new contracts in Russia and Belarus. Articles already commissioned from authors in Russia will continue be handled according to standard Annual Reviews editorial procedures.
For Ukraine,the paywall on all 51 Annual Reviews journals was removed on 3 March, 2022, making Annual Reviews content openly available there.
Read more>>
