old id = 467
Best iPhone (2022): Which Model Should You Actually Buy? | WIRED
2020
https://www.wired.com/gallery/iphone-buying-guide

To revisit this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
To revisit this article, select My Account, thenView saved storiesJulian ChokkattuWhich iPhone Should You Buy (or Avoid) Right Now?So you're wonderingwhich iPhone is best for you. Apple has more options than ever, from theiPhone 13 Pro Maxto the newly updatediPhone SE. We're here to help you separate the marketing slogans from reality. After checking out all the latest models, we outline the strengths and weaknesses of each in our iPhone buying guide.
Be sure to check out our otherguides, including theBest iPhone 13 Deals,Best iPhone 13 Cases and Accessories,Best iPhone 12 Cases,Best iPhone SE Cases,Best iPads, andBest MacBooks.
Updated March 2022: We've added our thoughts about the iPhone SE 2022.
Special offer for Gear readers: Get a1-year subscription toWIREDfor $5 ($25 off). This includes unlimited access toWIRED.
com and our print magazine (if you'd like). Subscriptions help fund the work we do every day.
If you're upgrading from an iPhone, you can trade it to Apple to get a small discount. Before you do that, check whether you can sell it elsewhere for more money. iPhones hold their value incredibly well, particularly if they're in mint or good condition. Wehave a guidethat runs through a few websites you can use.
Don't forget toback up your old iPhonebefore you switch to a newer model, which will help youtransfer everything without losing any data. Remember tofactory-reset your old iPhone before selling it. You might find our guideson setting up a new iPhoneandhow to fix ithelpful too.
If you buy something using links in our stories, we may earn a commission. This helps support our journalism.
Learn more. Please also considersubscribing to WIREDBest iPhone DealApple has refreshed its most affordable iPhone for a third generation (7/10, WIRED Recommends), though you'll be hard-pressed to spot the differences. Externally, there are none—even the cases for the 2020 model will fit the iPhone SE 2022. (We've rounded up ourfavorite cases and accessories here.) That means you still get a cramped yet compact 4.7-inch LCD screen with a physical home button, thick bezels around the screen, and Touch ID. There's noMagSafe accessory systemhere, and the headphone jack remains nonexistent, but at least you still get plain ol'wireless charging. This is also the only iPhone in the lineupwithoutultrawide-band support, which improves AirDrop and lets youprecisely find nearby AirTags.
Internally, it's a whole lot more powerful than the previous generation. It has the same A15 Bionic processor as the iPhone 13 models, making this budget phone a powerhouseamong its peersand capable of running the most demanding games. That chip also brings better battery life, but the SE will last you roughly a day of use—less if you're a heavy user. It getssub-6 5G connectivity, meaning it won't be able to hit the super-fast internet speeds available on pricier iPhones, but this isn't a big deal as you rarely run into thattype of 5G. The single-lens rear camera takes pretty great daytime shots, but sadly, as there's no night mode, low-light images are lackluster compared to phones like theGoogle Pixel 5A.
Level Up With This PickThe iPhone 13 (8/10, WIRED Recommends) is the best iPhone for most people. Apple brought in a few features from previous Pro models, such as sensor-shift stabilization on the main camera to correct for your shaky hands, and 128 gigabytes of base storage instead of the paltry 64 it offered before. The 6.1-inch OLED screen is also just the right size. One of the best new additions is Cinematic mode, which merges Portrait mode with video and adds a blur effect around your subject. It can be a little finicky, though. Overall, the cameras have improved. The wide and ultrawide can take in more light, producing sharper and brighter nighttime shots.
Battery life is better, easily lasting a full day and then some with heavy usage, and the A15 Bionic chip powering it is no slouch. It's IP68 water-resistant, has 5G, and maintains theMagSafe accessory systemfrom its predecessor. If you thought the original launch colors were a bit lackluster, well, it now comes in green.
Note:There'sno charging adapterincluded (nor earbuds) with any of the iPhone 13 models, just a USB-C to Lightning cable. You might need tobuy an adapterif you don't have a USB-C one lying around.
For Small-Phone LoversHate giant phones? This is the smallest iPhone, and it's one of the tiniest smartphones on the market, period. Apple stuck with the modern iPhone design—slim borders around the screen and Face ID instead of Touch ID—so you get a larger 5.4-inch OLED screen than on the iPhone SE 2022, even though the phone itself is physically smaller. It has the exact same features as the iPhone 13 above, but since it's so small, it does suffer from poor battery life. The Mini will keep the lights on until bedtime, but depending on how heavily you use it, you may need to tote around aportable charger.
The Ultimate iPhoneThere are valid reasons to pay $1,000 and up for the iPhone 13 Pro or iPhone 13 Pro Max (8/10, WIRED Recommends). They're a mix of glass and stainless steel, instead of aluminum, so they're more durable. The Max also has a large, 6.7-inch OLED screen, so it's a must-have for anyone who needs the biggest display possible (that's not aniPad Mini). The 6.1-inch Pro has the same set of features this year, so you won't miss out if you go small. That includes a120-Hz refresh rate, which makes interacting with the screen feel smoother. The OLED screens can also get a little brighter, and the batteries last a full day, if not more, with heavy use. For the first time, there's a performance bump over the cheaper models too. An extra graphics core helps demanding games run a tad better in our tests than on last year's iPhone 12 Pro.
The triple-camera system includes a 3X optical zoom camera, and Night mode works on all of them. All three sensors can take in more light, so they'll snap sharper and brighter images in low light. The ultrawide camera doubles as a macro cam, so you can push your phone right up against your dog's snoot for a close-up. With all those photos you're going to take, it’s too bad these Pro phones don’t come with 256 gigabytes of storage, like the iPhone 13, instead of 128 GB. Since its launch, Apple has added a new alpine green color to choose from.
The Midrange iPhoneIf you don't need the latest and greatest iPhone, but you don't want to buy used, then Apple hasthreeother choices for you: theiPhone 12,iPhone 12 Mini, andiPhone 11. If you're eyeing the 12 Mini, I'd pay the extra $100 and go for the iPhone 13 Mini, which gets you double the storage, nicer cameras, and slightly better battery life. That last point is important, as the original Mini's battery life wasreallylackluster.
The 64-GB iPhone 12 is also a bit of a hard sell at its $729 price. So unless you desperately want to join theMagSafe ecosystem, the iPhone 11 hits the sweet spot of having a reasonable price for what you get. The A13 Bionic processor inside is plenty powerful, the main camera supports Night mode, and you still get an ultrawide lens for some versatility. There's no OLED, it doesn't have flat edges or 5G, but you get IP68 water resistance and wireless charging, and the battery will last you about a full day. We havea few case recommendationstoo.
If It’s $800 or Less …Apple completely canceled theiPhone 12 ProandiPhone 12 Pro Maxfrom 2020, but they're still fine to buy. They have speedy processors and three rear cameras, so you can zoom out with the ultrawide or zoom in with the telephoto. Everything else is par for the course, with stainless steel bodies, excellent OLED displays, daylong battery life, water resistance, and wireless charging. Since the iPhone 13 starts at $829, try not to spend more than $800 on these phones. Practically speaking, most retailers no longer have them, unless you don't mindbuying renewed from Amazon. But you may be able to snag one in new or mint condition on resale websites likeSwappa.
Avoid These iPhones!The iPhone XS, XR, X, 8, 7, 6S, SE (2016), and every older iPhone that came before them are probably available somewhere, but you shouldn't take the bait. They don't have the processing power to keep up with the latest software, and even if they do, they will have a much shorter software shelf life. If you can find them, theiPhone 11 Pro and 11 Pro Maxare worth considering, but only for less than $500. TheiPhone SE 2020is OK to buy too, but only for less than $300.
The iPhone 6 was cut off from receiving theiOS 14 update, and whileiOS 15works on the 6S, it's just too old. Without software support, your device will slowly become less secure and could become a slow, buggy mess. The camera tech in these models isn't as refined, either. Unless they're almost free, we think you're better off with the new iPhone SE or another model on this list.
Is It a Good Time to Buy?Yep. If you want a new iPhone with the latest design and features, this is an excellent time to buy. And the same is true if you prefer the physical home button, thanks to the third-generation iPhone SE. We won't see another new flagship iPhone range (presumably called the iPhone 14) until September.
If you don't really want to spend the money to get a new iPhone, consider a fresh battery. If the biggest issues with your aging iPhone revolve around the battery, then replacing it might make it feel brand-new. Replacements for olderiPhones are $49and $69 for newer models. If that doesn't do the trick, read our guide onways to fix your iPhone's problems, orour guide on selling your iPhoneto get the most money out of it.
Don’t Overpay for a CaseiPhones are made of glass, and glass breaks, even if Apple uses ceramic to strengthen it. You need a case. Wireless carriers and Apple know this and will try to upsell you on $60 to $70 cases and expensive accessories for your phone. If the cost doesn't matter to you, go for it. We've rounded upour favorite iPhone 13andiPhone SE cases here.
MagneticMagSafe wireless chargingis available only on iPhone 12 and iPhone 13 models. You can get first-party accessories like Apple's wirelessMagSafe Charger, which sticks to the back of the phone for faster charging. Or snag theMagSafe Wallet. There are plenty of third-party accessories now available (you'll find quite a fewin our guide). If you use a case, make sure you get one that's MagSafe compatible to ensure a strong magnetic connection with Apple's accessories. All the cases we recommend are MagSafe-tested by yours truly.
WIRED COUPONSExtra savings up to $15 with TurboTax discountH&R Block Promotion: Free online tax filingShop shoes on sale for under $100 from Finish LineExtra 20% off sitewide - Dyson promo code 2022GoPro Hot Deal: $150 off the new HERO10 Black BonesSamsung coupon - 45% off select items + free shippingMore From WIREDContact© 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of ourUser AgreementandPrivacy Policy and Cookie StatementandYour California Privacy Rights.
Wiredmay earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
Ad Choices
