old id = 812
Policies and guidelines - Ofcom
2020
https://www.ofcom.org.uk/about-ofcom/policies-and-guidelines

Policies and guidelinesA list of Ofcom's policies and guidelines.
Approach to the coronavirus (Covid-19)This is an unprecedented time for our country, and keeping communications going across the UK has never been more important. Over the next few months Ofcom’s sectors will play a vital role in supporting families, businesses and individuals as we all adapt the way we live, work and communicate in the wake of the coronavirus.
See more aboutwhat this means for our areas of work.
Ofcom haspublished informationon Royal Mail’s operations during the coronavirus pandemic, which includes changes to certain services.
Ofcomwrote to telecoms providers (PDF, 152.4 KB)in November 2020 to ensure there is continued support for consumers struggling to pay their bills at a time of increased reliance on telecoms services.
Approach to enforcementOur enforcement guidelines explain how we investigate compliance with and approach enforcement of regulatory requirements relating to electronic communications networks and services, postal services, consumer protection legislation, competition law and certain competition-related conditions in broadcast licences.
Enforcement guidelines for regulatory investigations (PDF, 1.6 MB)Enforcement guidelines for Competition Act investigations (PDF, 1007.1 KB)Procedures for investigating breaches of competition-related conditions in Broadcasting Act licences (PDF, 784.7 KB)Advice for complainants (PDF, 186.1 KB)Better policy making: Ofcom's approach to impact assessmentThe decisions which Ofcom makes can impose significant costs on our stakeholders and it is important for us to think very carefully before adding to the burden of regulation. One of our key regulatory principles is that we have a bias against intervention. This means that a high hurdle must be overcome before we regulate. If intervention is justified, we aim to choose the least intrusive means of achieving our objectives, recognising the potential for regulation to reduce competition. These guidelines explain how Impact Assessments will be used to help us apply these principles in a transparent and justifiable way.
Better Policy Making - Ofcom's approach to Impact Assessment (PDF, 79.2 KB)Business Impact TargetUnder the Small Business, Enterprise and Employment Act 2015 (‘the SBEE Act’), we have a statutory obligation to produce an assessment of the economic impact on business of every qualifying regulatory provision we make during the relevant period. A qualifying regulatory provision is one that does not fall under any of the exclusions prescribed in the SBEE Act.
See more about Ofcom'sBusiness Impact Target.
Carbon audit resultsOfcom carried out an initial carbon audit in 2007 and subsequently committed to a challenging 25% reduction in carbon emissions by 2013. Over the past few years, Ofcom has undertaken a number of initiatives to reduce emissions as part of its Footprint and Sustainability project.
Ofcom has conducted a number of subsequent audits to assess progress against this overall reduction target. An audit in 2009 confirmed a total footprint of 4,716 tonnes compared to a 5,525 tonne baseline, equating to a 15% reduction in emissions. A further audit in 2011 confirmed a total footprint of 4,367 tonnes, bringing the overall reduction to 21%.
Ofcom's latest audit in 2013 confirmed a total footprint of 3,878 tonnes. This represents a 1,647 tonne reduction compared to the baseline, equating to an overall reduction of 30% and exceeding our original reduction target. The full carbon audit can be found below. We will continue to monitor our internal KPIs in order to reduce our emissions further in subsequent years.
Note that the original carbon audit showed a baseline footprint of 6,402 tonnes, however this was retrospectively updated by the carbon auditors in 2009 to account for revised carbon methodology, changes in conversion factors to align with Defra updates and minor changes to base-year input data.
OFCOM Final report Carbon Audit 2013 (PDF, 1.4 MB)Complaints to or about OfcomPlease follow the guidelines below depending on the nature of your complaint.
Read more oncomplaints to or about Ofcom.
Corporate responsibilityCorporate Responsibility (CR) is the action we take to ensure we are not only a responsible employer towards our colleagues, but that we also recognise and manage our impact on the wider environment and community.
Our CR programme brings together three key areas of activity that are embedded throughout the organisation:Find out more aboutcorporate responsibility at Ofcom.
Diversity and equalityTreat all colleagues with dignity and respect in an inclusive and fair working environment. Promote equality of opportunity for all, not only within Ofcom but also the sectors we regulate.
At Ofcom we are determined to do all we can to promoteDiversity and Equalityinside our organisation and in the wider sectors we regulate.
Environmental PolicyOfcom understands that we are in challenging times in terms of global environmental impacts. We all have a part to play in addressing threats to our planet natural systems and biodiversity. Ofcom is therefore committed to assessing, understanding, and finally improving its environmental performance.
ReadOfcom's Environmental PolicyExternal contact policy: unacceptable behaviourOfcom is committed to providing a fair, transparent, impartial and accessible service for all of its stakeholders. However, we have to ensure that we provide a safe working environment for our colleagues and that we are able to work efficiently and effectively.
On occasions, individuals (whether members of the public, or individuals representing an organisation, such as a regulated company or supplier) may make unreasonable demands or demonstrate unreasonable behaviour. Ourunacceptable behaviour policy (PDF, 133.0 KB)explains how we may manage contact with that stakeholder.
General Privacy StatementIn accordance with our legal obligations, ourGeneral Privacy Statementsets out the information you need to know about the way in which Ofcom will collect, process and store your personal data, how long we will keep it for, your rights in connection with that data, and the people with whom we may need to share it.
Information RegistryOfcom has launched theInformation Registryto strengthen the way we collect and manage information from organisations we work with.
Networks & Services admin fees listIn line with section 3.8 ofOfcom's Statement of Charging Principleswe publish the following list of Networks & Services providers who pay administrative fees. Listed below are all providers who are liable to pay these fees, as set out in thenotice of designation. The fees payable remain confidential to the companies concerned and are based on self-certified relevant turnover submissions for the appropriate calendar year as defined in our Statement of Charging Principles.
Networks & Services Providers Billed for 2019/20 Ofcom Administrative Charges (PDF, 247.2 KB)Northern Ireland Equality SchemeSection 75 of the Northern Ireland Act 1998 (the Act) requires public authorities, in carrying out their functions relating to Northern Ireland, to have due regard to the need to promote equality of opportunity and regard to the desirability of promoting good relations across a range of categories outlined in the Act.
Revised Northern Ireland Equality Scheme for Ofcom (PDF, 332.9 KB)Disability Action Plan for Northern Ireland (PDF, 160.6 KB)Ofcom’s commitment to the Welsh LanguageOfcom takes the fulfilment of its obligations in relation to the Welsh language extremely seriously. We are proud of our commitment and the way in whichwe integrate the Welsh language into our workon a daily basis – enabling consumers to communicate with Ofcom in the language of their choice, be it in English or Welsh.
Compliance noticeOfcom’s final compliance notice from the Welsh Language Commissioner has Ofcom’s full support.
Compliance Notice - Section 44 Welsh Language (Wales) Measure 2011 (PDF, 360.3 KB)Implementation planThis document states how we intend to comply with the service delivery standards, policy making standards and the operational standards issued to Ofcom by the Welsh Language Commissioner.
Welsh Language Standards - Implementation Plan (PDF, 144.4 KB)Safonau’r Gymraeg - Cynllun Gweithredu (PDF, 132.7 KB)Ofcom’s data collection and research programmeWhy do we conduct research?Ofcom is an evidence-based regulator. Market research is important to Ofcom and many of our decisions are informed by research evidence.
The citizen and consumer interest is at the heart of everything Ofcom does. Research ensures that Ofcom has a thorough, robust and up-to-date understanding of consumers in the UK.
We work with independent market research agencies to conduct research among consumers of communications services.
How do we collect data?Our market intelligence team collects and analyses information from industry; directly, by using our power to make formal requests; and indirectly, by using third-party information sources. It monitors and interprets market developments and industry trends, across the media and telecommunications sectors and other relevant industries, at company, sector, UK and overseas levels.
Where can I find Ofcom’s research and data publications?We publish our research, so that industry stakeholders and consumers can benefit from it. All our publications are on the website at theresearch and data section.
Penalty guidelinesThese penalty guidelines, published 13 September 2017, replace the penalty guidelines published 3 December 2015.
Section 392 of the Communications Act 2003 (“the Act”) requires Ofcom to prepare and publish a statement containing the guidelines it proposes to follow in determining the amount of penalties imposed by Ofcom under the Act or any other enactment apart from the Competition Act 1998. This statement contains Ofcom’spenalty guidelines 2017 (PDF, 182.9 KB)Policy on pre-disclosure of documentsOfcom will generally not pre-disclose its documents to stakeholders ahead of publication. For further information contact the Ofcom analyst relations manager.
Procedure for making a disclosure to Ofcom under the Public Interest Disclosure Act (PIDA)The Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998 ('PIDA'/'Act') came into effect on 1 January 1999. The Act gives legal protection to employees against being dismissed or penalised by their employers as a result of disclosing information which is considered to be in the public interest. The principle of the Act is that where an individual discovers information which he or she believes to show malpractice or wrongdoing within their organisation that this information should be disclosed without fear of reprisal. This should be facilitated by a process which ensures that the person making the disclosure is afforded proper protection and that the information is acted upon quickly. The Act offers a right to redress in the event of victimisation if individuals raise concerns in the ways specified by the legislation.
Ofcom has a policy in place for its own employees and is obliged (it is a 'prescribed person') under the Act to put in place a procedure under which individuals working outside Ofcom but in the communications sector may contact Ofcom if they have concerns about possible wrongdoing at their own organisation and where they have been unable to raise or resolve those concerns internally. Ofcom is a Prescribed Person under the Act to which external disclosures can be made on matters relating to:Procedure for making a disclosure to Ofcom under the Public Interest Disclosure Act (PIDA).
Records and information management policyThis document outlines Ofcom's commitment to maintain records of its activities, the key principles for managing records in all media, and the roles of all colleagues in its management.
Why do we keep records?Ofcom must maintain a complete set of records for as long as required to:Find out more aboutrecords and information management policy at Ofcom.
Regulatory principlesWhen we regulateOfcom will operate with a bias against intervention, but with a willingness to intervene promptly and effectively where required.
Ofcom will intervene where there is a specific statutory duty to work towards a goal that markets alone cannot achieve.
How we regulateOfcom will always seek the least intrusive regulatory methods of achieving its objectives.
Ofcom will strive to ensure that interventions are evidence-based, proportionate, consistent, accountable and transparent in both deliberation and outcome.
Ofcom will regulate with a clearly articulated and publicly reviewed annual plan, with stated objectives.
How we support regulationOfcom will research markets constantly and will aim to remain at the forefront of technological understanding.
Ofcom will consult widely with all relevant stakeholders and assess the impact of regulatory action before imposing regulation on a market.
Retention of Amounts paid under the Wireless Telegraphy Act 2006This document sets out the principles under which Ofcom may retain certain amounts which have been paid to it under the Wireless Telegraphy Act 2006. It also sets out why, in Ofcom’s view, the provision made for retaining these amounts is likely to secure that such amounts are objectively justifiable and proportionate to the likely costs which it is practicable for Ofcom to estimate.
Statement of Principles: Retention of Amounts paid under the Wireless Telegraphy Act 2006 (PDF, 587.4 KB)Simplification plan: 2007Ofcom is committed to reducing regulation and minimising administrative burdens on its stakeholders. We have a bias against regulatory intervention and, where we do need to intervene, we seek to use the least intrusive mechanisms. We also recognise the importance of keeping under review, and minimising, the burdens imposed by existing regulation. A key part of this is ensuring that our operational processes are efficient and user friendly.
This Simplification Plan sets out what Ofcom has done to reduce regulation since publishing our last Simplification Plan in December 2006, and outlines the further initiatives we will be taking over the coming year. For the purpose of consistency, any reference to "simplification initiatives" includes initiatives that are aimed at reducing regulatory burdens on our stakeholders, including administrative burdens associated with regulatory compliance.
Simplification plan: 2007 (PDF, 195.5 KB)Supplying OfcomProcurement overview (PDF, 302.3 KB)Services Terms and Conditions (PDF, 405.6 KB)Supplies Terms and Conditions (PDF, 446.8 KB)On-line tendering systemOfcom’s eSourcing Portal is hosted byBravoSolution. Your organisation will require prior registration (only once).
Guide to the eSourcing Portal (PDF, 296.0 KB)Current Tender OpportunitiesRelated content14 September 20174 April 202210 September 2010FooterAdvice for businessesAbout OfcomAbout this website© Ofcom 2022You have no saved pages
