old id = 954
About IAB
2020
https://www.iab.com/our-story

Enter your email address and we'll send you a link you can use to pick a new password.
If you no longer have access to the email inbox for your username, enter it here. If you have a recovery email on your account we'll send instructions to that email to change your username.
If you do not have a recovery email, contact[email protected]Our StoryThe Interactive Advertising Bureau empowers the media and marketing industries to thrive in the digital economy. Its membership comprises more than 700 leading media companies, brands, agencies, and the technology firms responsible for selling, delivering, and optimizing digital ad marketing campaigns. The trade group fields critical research on interactive advertising, while also educating brands, agencies, and the wider business community on the importance of digital marketing. In affiliation with theIAB Tech Lab, IAB develops technical standards and solutions. IAB is committed to professional development and elevating the knowledge, skills, expertise, and diversity of the workforce across the industry. Through the work of its public policy office in Washington, D.C., the trade association advocates for its members and promotes the value of the interactive advertising industry to legislators and policymakers. Founded in 1996, IAB is headquartered in New York City.
TheIAB Global Networkbrings together a total of 45 IAB organizations, including three regional organizations, to share challenges, develop global solutions, and advance the digital advertising industry worldwide. IABs are located in North America, South America, Africa, Asia, Asia Pacific and Europe. Each association is independently owned and operated, functioning under bylaws consonant with local market needs.
Interested in becoming an IAB member? Contact us to apply.
Our InitiativesOur OrganizationsExperience CenterMedia CenterProgrammatic+Data CenterTech LabJoin IABParticipate with interactive leaders in shaping the industryCollaborate with peers to establish guidelines, standards, and best practicesDrive industry researchProtect your business interests by helping steer IAB public policy effortsPower growth of the interactive industryImprove your organization’s operational efficiencyWho We AreExecutive CommitteeDavid CohenDavid Cohen joined IAB in April 2020 as President and was named Chief Executive Officer in September 2020. Cohen is a widely respected advertising agency leader who, prior to IAB, served as President, North America for MAGNA, Interpublic Group’s (IPG) centralized media intelligence, investment, and innovation arm. In this role, Cohen was responsible for more than $20 billion in media spend. During his tenure, Cohen structured and executed large global transactions on behalf of IPG and its clients, with such major IAB member companies as Facebook, Google, Microsoft, Spotify, Twitter, and Verizon Media.
Prior to MAGNA, Cohen served as Chief Investment Officer of UM, ensuring that digital innovation, data, and technology acumen flowed throughout the agency to drive performance. From 2001 to 2011, Cohen served in critical, transformational roles at UM during the explosive growth of digital advertising, including Chief Media Officer, Chief Digital Officer, and Executive Vice President, U.S. Director of Digital Communications. In the late 1990’s, Cohen was responsible for launching and building IPG’s digital practice.
Cohen has a long history of working with trade organizations including IAB and 4As, where he served as chairman of the Interactive Marketing Committee from 2009-2013. He has also been instrumental in initiating several vital industry-wide programs, including the Future of Television, facilitated by EY. Cohen is a Queens native, with a bachelor’s degree in communications from Adelphi University. He was recognized by Adweek as a “Media All Star” and was part of the “Adweek 50” in 2012.
In 2016, David was elected to the Board of Directors of Partnership with Children a non-profit whose mission is to strengthen the emotional, social, and cognitive skills of vulnerable children in New York City to help them succeed in school, society, and life.
David enjoys spending time with his wife and two teenage daughters. A self-described gadget-geek and sometimes fitness fanatic – he ran the NYC Marathon in 2014 and 2019 and Boston Marathon in 2016.
Krishan BhatiaKrishan Bhatia serves as President & Chief Business Officer for NBCUniversal’s Advertising Sales division, reporting to Linda Yaccarino, Chairman, Global Advertising & Partnerships. Bhatia, with the help of his 500-person team, oversees Digital & Advanced Advertising Sales as well as the division’s One Platform Strategy, Partnerships, Product, Technology, Measurement and Operations functions — spanning a portfolio of TV, streaming and digital assets that reaches 230 Million viewers every month, including the company’s ad-supported streaming platform Peacock.
In 2021, Bhatia launched the company’s Enterprise Data unit to develop NBCUnified, the first-party data platform that serves NBCUniversal’s entire portfolio – including all TV & streaming properties, the NBC News Group, Universal Filmed Entertainment and Universal Parks & Resorts.
Bhatia also manages the corporate partnerships with Comcast Advertising, Freewheel and Sky Media, as well NBCU’s advertising partnerships with Amazon, Apple, Google/YouTube, Roku, Snap, The Trade Desk, TikTok, Twitter and others.
Bhatia took on his role at NBCUniversal after Comcast acquired the company in 2011 and led the integration of the two companies’ advertising businesses. He joined Comcast in 2005 as a founding executive team member of Comcast Interactive Media, where he played an instrumental role in creating and growing the digital media business for Comcast through acquisitions and partnerships.
Prior to Comcast, Bhatia was a Principal with Booz Allen Hamilton’s Global Media & Entertainment Practice in New York, advising many of the world’s leading media and technology companies.
Bhatia serves as chairman of the IAB and a board member of OpenAP.
Alysia BorsaAlysia Borsa is President of Meredith Digital of Meredith Corporation’s National Media Group, the leading multi-platform media company focused on women – reaching 95% of all U.S. women and more than 190 million unduplicated American consumers every month. Borsa oversees all digital strategy, content, products, technology, sales, marketing, e-commerce and operations for the company’s 40+ iconic brands, including PEOPLE, Better Homes & Gardens, Allrecipes, Southern Living and REAL SIMPLE.
Since joining Meredith a decade ago, Borsa has served in several executive roles, including EVP/Chief Data Officer, Chief Business Officer and Chief Marketing Officer. Her distinguished record and forward-thinking approach have been instrumental in Meredith achieving many key milestones, including the establishment of the Meredith Data Studio. This suite of advertising solutions leverages the company’s rich, proprietary first-party data and predictive insights capabilities, helping to inform its partners’ marketing, product and business strategies. Under Borsa’s leadership, Meredith has also expanded its business partnerships with a wide array of retailers and blue chip marketers.
Prior to Meredith, Borsa held senior positions in the technology, telecommunications and consulting sectors. She worked at Nokia, Comcast and Accenture, developing and executing strategies to grow new and legacy businesses.
Borsa serves on the ANA’s Data & Technology Growth Council and the boards of directors of the Interactive Advertising Bureau; AdLedger, an industry blockchain trade group; and 4-H, a nonprofit youth development organization.
Gina GarrubboGina Garrubbo is President and CEO of National Public Media (NPM), where she is committed to ensuring the continued growth of NPR and the public media system via funding from corporate sponsors. Garrubbo has spent more than 20 years in traditional and digital media growing marketing and sales teams, launching brands and building companies. She was one of the builders of Women.com, one of the first websites for women, and BlogHer, which brought independent voices to millions of readers. Garrubbo built advertising sales teams for Oxygen Media, Discovery Communications and in syndicated television. She is Chair of the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB) Board of Directors. She also sits on the Board of Directors of Tappp (an OTT video service), Glen Highland Farm and the Philanthropic Leadership board of EatREAL.org.
Jean-Philippe (JP) MaheuJean-Philippe (JP) Maheu is the VP of US Client Services at Twitter, where he leads Twitter’s relationships with its top marketers and manages a team of industry & regional leaders. Prior to this role, JP launched the Global Brands team at Twitter and led the global expansion of Twitter Brand Strategy and Agency Development teams.
Maheu joined Twitter in 2013 through the acquisition of SocialTV analytics company Bluefin Labs, where he was CEO. Under JP’s leadership, Bluefin achieved remarkable sales traction with leading brands and strengthened its market leading position.
Prior to Bluefin Labs, JP served as the Global CEO of Publicis Modem, the digital marketing unit of Publicis Worldwide. Maheu also held positions as both the Chief Digital Officer of Ogilvy & Mather, where he was responsible for digital growth and innovation across the company’s operating units, and CEO of Razorfish, where he led the vision, strategy and growth of the company.
JP holds a MBA from J.L. Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University and a M.S. in Network & Computer Sciences from Pierre et Marie Curie University in Paris, France. He sits on the boards of the IAB, the Mobile Marketing Association, and the NY Chapter of The Nature Conservancy, and lives in NYC with his wife and two children.
Peter NaylorPeter Naylor is Vice President of Americas at Snap, responsible for driving the growth of the company’s advertising business across the United States, Canada and Mexico. Previously, Peter served as SVP and Head of Advertising Sales at Hulu, where he worked for over six years. Prior to Hulu, Peter was EVP of Digital Media Sales for NBCUniversal (NBCU) where he ran digital advertising sales for NBCU’s entertainment, news and sports digital properties. Before NBCU, Peter served as the SVP of Sales for the iVillage Properties, which was acquired by NBCU in May 2006. Prior to joining iVillage, he served as Vice President of Sales for Terra Lycos. He started his internet sales career at Wired Digital. He serves on the Board of Directors for the IAB, the IRTS Foundation and the TD Foundation, an not-for-profit organization that provides aid to children of wounded warriors.
Ex OfficioMiranda DimopoulosMiranda Dimopoulos is the Regional CEO of the IAB SEA+India, a not-for-profit association that elevates the digital industry locally, regionally and globally.
Under her leadership, the membership has grown more than twelvefold in the last five years. An economist and expert on Asia, Miranda is a sought-after public speaker and commentator internationally on the insights and opportunities to grow investment in this diverse region. She has served as a Singapore Government Board Member for Critical Infocomm Technology since 2016, is an official advisor to the Indonesia, Thailand and India Governments and launched the 2018 partnership with the Economic Development Board (EDB) and Workforce Singapore (WSG) for a 2 year programme developing Programmatic talent.
Miranda was one of Campaign APAC’s 40 under 40 2016, CMO Asia and World Brand Congress Top 50 Leaders in Asia 2016, Campaign APAC Women to Watch (Agents of Change) 2016, the only person from APAC on the The Drum New Years Global Honours List 2017, World Women’s Congress Super Influencer 2017 (Top 10 Global Leaders) and Business Top Leader APAC 2018.
Towney FeehanTownsend Feehan is CEO of IAB Europe. Prior to joining IAB Europe, Townsend worked for Microsoft Legal & Corporate Affairs in Brussels and ran EU industry associations in the ICT, consumer electronics and biotechnology sectors. Townsend has an M. Phil. in European policy from the law faculty of the University of Edinburgh.
Stu IngisStuart Ingis, Partner at Venable LLP, is nationally recognized as a leading attorney on privacy, marketing, advertising, eCommerce, and Internet law. He co-leads Venable’s privacy practice, which won the Chambers USA Award for Excellence for the top privacy practice and top advertising practice in the United States. He has also been repeatedly listed in the first tier of privacy attorneys in Chambers USA, Legal 500 and ComputerWorld magazine.
Mr. Ingis regularly represents companies in the media, communications, Internet, information services, advertising, and retail industries before the US Congress and the Federal Trade Commission as well as before other federal and state agencies. He defends companies in investigations by the FTC and State Consumer Protection Authorities. He regularly counsels clients on privacy and marketing issues and practices. He conducts internal assessments of company practices and products, and works with companies to design and implement compliance systems and best practices. He has represented CEOs in testimony before Congressional Committees.
Mr. Ingis brings coalitions together and leads self-regulatory efforts in the eCommerce, online, privacy, and data security space. He serves as general and policy counsel to the Direct Marketing Association, Washington advertising and privacy counsel to the Interactive Advertising Bureau, and general and policy counsel to the Digital Advertising Alliance.
Rich LeFurgyRich LeFurgy has been a board member, advisor or investor in over 55 online advertising companies, drawing from over a 30 year career in advertising. LeFurgy was Founding Chairman of the IAB and sfBIG, a Venture Capitalist (WaldenVC), head of ad sales at Starwave (ESPN.com) and the Walt Disney Internet Group. Prior to Starwave, LeFurgy had a 17 year career at traditional ad agency NWAyer in New York, working on clients AT&T, Proctor & Gamble, Avon, Gillette and Dupont, among others.
He started online advertising business accelerator Archer in 2004, helping early stage online advertising companies reach takeoff velocity with strategic advisory services in fundraising, trade marketing and sales. LeFurgy received ad:tech’s Industry Achievement Award (2008), the IAB’s Lifetime Achievement Award (2004), was inducted into Advertising Age’s Interactive Hall of Fame (2000). He was recognized by USA Today as the “Johnny Appleseed of online advertising”.
LeFurgy has served on company boards as a director, including Blue Lithium and Associated Content (both sold to Yahoo!) and Web Clients (sold to ValueClick), and is currently on the board of Placecast. He has also provided advisory services to large and small online advertising companies (Google, AOL, Blue Lithium, Glam, and Placecast) and has personally invested in a number of promising online advertising startups, such as Klout, Ad Relevance (sold to Nielsen NetRatings), Grouper/Crackle (sold to Sony) and Blue Lithium (sold to Yahoo!), among others.
David MooreRandall RothenbergRandall Rothenberg is the Executive Chair of the Interactive Advertising Bureau, the trade association for digital media and marketing in the United States. Among the IAB’s 750 member companies are such major platforms as Google, Facebook, Microsoft, and Snap; the nation’s most important ad-supported media companies, including The New York Times, Walt Disney Co., NBC Universal, ViacomCBS, Hearst Magazines, Spotify, Verizon Media, Hulu, Warner Media, LinkedIn, and Meredith; incumbent and disruptor brands, including Coca-Cola, Walmart, Procter & Gamble, Hubble Contacts, ThirdLove, General Motors, Johnson & Johnson, and Citigroup; and scores of technology and data companies, among them Mediamath, LiveRamp, Quantcast, and Pubmatic.
John TooheyJohn was the Group Vice President of Finance for Time Warner Cable Media in New York, serving as the finance lead for TWC’s $1 billion advertising arm.
Prior to this role, John spent a year establishing TWC’s change management function as Group Vice President of Operational Effectiveness. John coordinated process improvement activities across the company. John previously spent six years as a leader in TWC’s Corporate Finance group, including three years heading up TWC’s investor relations support and competitive analysis activities as Vice President of Financial Analysis and Special projects, as well as three years in charge of TWC’s Corporate Financial Planning and Analysis team.
John’s broad media finance background includes four years at Cablevision, seven years at CBS and five years at NBC, all with progressive management responsibilities. John also spent three years as a mid-career management consultant at Booz Allen Hamilton, advising a variety of clients both inside and outside the media industry.
John holds a bachelor’s degree in Government from Harvard University, and an MBA from Columbia Business School. He and his wife Kristin have three children and live in Westport, CT.
Board of DirectorsRenie AndersonRenie Anderson was named Chief Revenue Officer and Executive Vice President, NFL Partnerships in March of 2019. In this role, Anderson oversees the League’s partnership divisions, including sponsorship, new business, consumer products, and media sales.
Anderson manages a team that creates new partnerships in open categories and maintains the relationships and activation of the NFL’s current corporate sponsors and licensees, including blue-chip companies such as Pepsi, Microsoft, P&G, Verizon, Bose, Nike, New Era, EA, and many more. In addition to partnerships, Anderson is also responsible for all media sales for the League’s owned and operated media assets, including NFL Network and NFL Digital Media.
Anderson, who joined the National Football League in 2006 after nine seasons at the Arena Football League, has garnered numerous awards and accolades. She is a Hall of Fame honoree of the Sports Business Journal’s prestigious Forty Under 40 award; an Ad Age 40 Under 40 winner; a 2016 WISE Woman of the Year; a Sports Business Journal “Game Changer”; and was named one of “The Most Powerful Women in Sports” by Adweek.
Anderson graduated from the University of Mississippi in 1997 with a degree in Journalism and resides in Darien, Conn., with her husband Chris McCloskey and daughters Callie and Kate.
Debi ChirichellaDebi Chirichella is president of Hearst Magazines, one of the world’s largest publishers of monthly magazines, with 25 U.S. titles and close to 300 international editions, after serving as executive vice president, chief financial officer and director of global operations for Hearst Magazines.
She joined Hearst Magazines as senior vice president and chief financial officer in November 2011, overseeing the company’s strategic financial planning and reporting. Previously, Chirichella spent seven years at Condé Nast, where she served in a number of executive positions. From 2008 until early 2011, she was chief operating officer of Condé Nast Digital; simultaneously, beginning in 2010, she was COO of the Fairchild Fashion Group. Before that, she was chief financial officer of Condé Nast Publications.
Earlier in her career, Chirichella held several high-level planning, finance and operations roles at Primedia, and most recently, she served as CFO/COO at Prometheus Global Media.
Chirichella is a graduate of Princeton University and received her master’s degree in business from Harvard University. She currently resides in Mountain Lakes, New Jersey, with her husband and three children.
Christine CookChristine Cook is senior vice president and chief revenue officer of CNN Digital, WarnerMedia Ad Sales. In this leadership position, Cook oversees sales strategy for CNN’s overall digital portfolio, which includes premium verticals, mobile products, programmatic, and emerging businesses. Based in New York, Cook reports to Joe Hogan, executive vice president of sales and marketing for WarnerMedia.
Cook plays a critical role in creating a holistic sales approach across CNN’s digital business, while strengthening digital revenue opportunities in line with the company’s go-to-market strategies. With a special focus on video, social and rich branded content campaigns, Cook also partners closely with the Content Partnerships team and Courageous brand studio to bring to life the KPIs of ad partners across CNN’s digital footprint.
Prior to joining WarnerMedia, Cook served as senior vice president and global head of advertising partnerships at Flipboard. During her six years at the company, Cook oversaw the global sales force and mobile-led revenue strategy. As an advisor, and then founding member of the advertising business team, she built the partnerships unit from the ground up, which was responsible for publisher partnerships, advertising sales, operations and creative brand marketing strategy. Prior to joining Flipboard in 2012, Cook held leadership roles at The Daily, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, IAC/InterActiveCorp, Financial Times, and New York Times Digital, where she founded the company’s first international sales office in London.
Cook was most recently named a 2020 She Runs It Changing the Game honoree. She also was honored as a 2019 Broadcasting & Cable Digital All-Star and on the 2018 Cynopsis Digital It List. She is an active member of the Internet Advertising Bureau (IAB), Mobile Marketing Association (MMA), Digital Ascendant, Digital Content Next, Advertising Women of New York/She Runs It, and New York Women in Communications. A graduate from Louisiana University with a Bachelor of Arts in English Literature, History and Spanish, Cook currently resides in New York City.
WarnerMedia is a leading media and entertainment company that creates and distributes premium and popular content from a diverse array of talented storytellers and journalists to global audiences through its consumer brands including: HBO, HBO Max, Warner Bros., TNT, TBS, truTV, CNN, DC, New Line, Cartoon Network, Adult Swim, Turner Classic Movies and others. The organization also includes Xandr’s suite of advanced advertising solutions designed to help to improve advertising for brands, publishers, and consumers. WarnerMedia is part of AT&T Inc. (NYSE:T).
Eric DanetzEric joined Thomson Reuters as Head of Revenue in April of 2020. In this role, Eric has oversight of all revenue lines and is responsible for accelerating growth across the Agency and Consumer businesses. He joined Reuters from AccuWeather, where he was Chief Business Officer, overseeing all global revenue-generating products, services, marketing and business development.
As the Head of Revenue for Reuters, Eric will lead our sales and customer success teams globally while establishing a holistic revenue growth strategy involving the targeting of new market segments, diversifying customers and categories, and identifying cross-selling opportunities across the wider portfolio.
Eric is an exceptional sales executive with an impressive track record in building new revenue streams, attracting new customers and scaling high growth media businesses. He reports into the President of Reuters and sits on the Reuters Executive Committee.
Jerry DischlerJerry Dischler is a Vice President and General Manager at Google, and oversees Google’s Advertising products including search, display, shopping, travel and video advertising, as well as analytics.
A 10+ year Ads veteran, Jerry led Google to move beyond plain text ads to deeper experiences, including the development of Ad Sitelinks and Product Listing Ads. Through various leadership roles on the team, he’s played an important role in defining the future of advertising at Google including leading the transition from desktop to mobile advertising, accelerating direct response advertising on YouTube, and developing new ad products for SMBs.
Prior to his current role, Jerry led the product and engineering teams for ads on Google’s owned and operated properties (Search, YouTube, Maps, Gmail, Discover), buying platforms (Google Ads, Search Ads 360, Display & Video 360), and Google’s home-grown sales and support platform. Earlier in his career at Google, Jerry led Google’s commerce products, including Google Checkout (now Google Pay) and Google Product Search (now Google Shopping).
Before Google, Jerry served as the Director of Engineering at Avolent where he was instrumental in developing the company’s award-winning billing and payment products. He also worked in engineering and leadership roles at Hyperion, Sana Security, and Accenture, where his work focused on enterprise billing, customer care, and security software.
Jerry earned his bachelor’s degree from the University of Chicago and his MBA from The Wharton School of Business.
Konrad FeldmanKonrad Feldman, CEO, co-founded and launched Quantcast in 2006 along with Paul Sutter to transform the effectiveness of online advertising through the use of science and scalable computing. Prior to co-founding Quantcast, Feldman co-founded Searchspace (now Fortent) the leading provider of terrorist financing detection and anti-money laundering software for the world’s financial services industry. As CEO of Searchspace’s North American business, he established the business in the US and directed its rapid growth to become a market leader. Prior to Searchspace, Feldman was a Research Fellow in the Intelligent Systems Laboratory at University College London. Feldman holds a Bachelor of Science in Computer Science from University College, London.
Tom FochettaTom Fochetta is an experienced business leader and media veteran with more than 20+ years of digital advertising experience. He currently serves as Vice President of Samsung Ads, a leading provider of Advanced TV advertising solutions.
Tom has a proven track record for spearheading high-impact sales teams at world-class media, commerce and hardware companies, including Google and Amazon. As the founding executive of Samsung Ads in 2015, Tom was tasked with establishing its global ad sales platform. Among his responsibilities, he leads the Americas’ ad sales, client solutions, and operations, and oversees the Company’s advertising platform across Samsung’s Smart TV and digital ecosystem.
Tom reports up into Samsung’s Corporate Offices in South Korea and frequently informs Executive Leadership of Market Conditions to seek further investment. Armed with a deep understanding of viewership preferences and Smart TV usage, Samsung Ads is a leader in Advanced TV, bringing innovation to advertising and empowering more efficient and effective media strategies. Under Tom’s leadership, Samsung Ads has achieved significant year-over-year growth over the past five years.
Through acquisitions, technology enhancements and the development of an end- to-end tech stack, Tom has opened up a new world of opportunities for the sales team and their clients. In fact, Tom championed the acquisition of AdGear and was part of the Deal Team from Samsung’s M&A arm to acquire the foundation of a fully owned and operated tech stack.
Today, Samsung Ads works with Fortune 500 advertisers selling and servicing ads natively, across over-the-top (OTT)/Connected TV, display and mobile, leveraging its unique audience platform. Tom is an outspoken advocate for the Advanced TV industry, not only sitting on the IAB’s Board of Directors but actively participating in many other industry associations to help educate the industry on Connected TV and evangelize Samsung Ads’ platform.
Tom holds an MBA and a Bachelor of Science in Marketing and Management from St. Johns University. He lives on Long Island with his wife and two sons.
Rajeev GoelRajeev Goel co-founded PubMatic in 2006, based on the belief that publishers are underserved from a technology and services perspective, and set out to build an automation software company focused on publishers. Under his leadership, the company has grown and matured into a major enterprise provider with more than 350 employees and 13 locations around the globe. The high pace of revenue and profit growth is fueled by Rajeev’s commitment to help publishers protect, monetize and manage their most valuable asset – the relationship between consumers, content and brands.
Rajeev is a serial entrepreneur who has raised more than $250 million in funding throughout his career.
Prior to PubMatic, he co-founded Chipshot.com, a leading online retailer of custom-built golf equipment, where he served as vice president of technology. At Chipshot, Rajeev also led product management and development, helping grow the company into a $30 million business. An experienced management consultant, he was also a principal at Diamond Management and Technology Consultants, an IT strategy consulting firm for Fortune 2000 clients, where he led teams on IT strategy engagements. In addition, Rajeev was a product marketing executive at SAP, where he was responsible for global go-to-market strategy for new products.
Rajeev served as a member of the Board of Directors of the Ad Council, a nonprofit organization and the largest producer of national public service campaigns in the U.S. He holds a master’s degree in computer science from the University of Pennsylvania and a bachelor’s degree in economics, political science and Spanish from the Johns Hopkins University.
John HalleyJohn Halley serves as Chief Operating Officer, Advertising Revenue, and Executive Vice President, Advanced Marketing Solutions (“AMS”) for ViacomCBS. In this role, Halley oversees commercial and business operations for the advertising team across the company’s leading portfolio of broadcast, entertainment, news and sports networks, as well as ViacomCBS’ advertising product suite and go-to-market strategy across its digital, social, and advanced advertising offerings spanning BET, CBS, CBS All Access, Comedy Central, MTV, Nickelodeon and Pluto TV, among others.
Halley is the former Chairman and serves on the Board of Directors of OpenAP, the television industry’s advanced audience platform, whose consortium membership includes ViacomCBS, Fox, NBCUniversal, AMC Networks, The Weather Channel and Univision. He also serves on the Board of Directors of Blockgraph, an industry-operated data and insights platform owned by ViacomCBS, Comcast NBCUniversal and Charter Communications that helps media companies and advertisers securely and transparently collaborate to apply data across TV and premium video inventory.
Halley is the Chairman of the New York Chapter of the March of Dimes, and serves on the Board of Directors of Literacy Inc., a New York-based childhood literacy organization. He holds an MBA from the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania and an Economics degree from Santa Clara University.
Jeremy HlavacekAs CRO for IBM Watson Advertising, Jeremy Hlavacek is responsible for all global advertising sales efforts including premium direct sales, programmatic sales, agency partnerships and data partnerships. His teams work across Watson Advertising’s portfolio of media, data, and AI-powered technology solutions, which includes The Weather Company’s consumer platforms such as weather.com and The Weather Channel apps. Watson Advertising’s offerings help agencies and marketers improve decision-making and drive value across key facets of the marketing lifecycle – from media planning to targeting and activation to measurement and optimization.
Previously, Hlavacek was SVP, global automated monetization for The Weather Company. In that role, he oversaw all programmatic monetization efforts globally and the data partnerships team, which drives off-property data and inventory partnerships with platforms and other publishers. Hlavacek was promoted from vice president of programmatic, where he was responsible for all domestic programmatic sales efforts, platform relationships and programmatic operations. Under his leadership, the programmatic business grew 500% over a 3 year period to become one of the largest and most sophisticated sell side programmatic businesses in the industry. In 2017, AdExchanger ranked The Weather Company’s programmatic business as #2 in the industry among all publishers in media and broadcasting. Hlavacek joined Weather in early 2013 as vice president of operations and strategic partnerships for the company’s WEATHERfx division, where he oversaw technology partnerships and business operations to support the WEATHERfx business.
Prior to Weather, Hlavacek was vice president of strategy and business operations at Varick Media Management, where he helped to build one of the first programmatic trading desks on the agency side. He was responsible for strategic platform partnerships in the ad tech/real-time bidding ecosystem, as well as the business and financial operations of the company.
Hlavacek’s previous experience includes building out digital marketing and gaming experiences at LEGO Toys, directing advertising strategy and business development at Dotmenu (an online food ordering startup acquired by GrubHub/Seamless), and building out digital experiences for entertainment programming at CBS Television. On the agency side, Jeremy has held senior strategic roles at Ogilvy and Cadient Group, where he advised clients in healthcare, financial services and technology.
Hlavacek holds a master’s degree in business administration from Cornell University, a master’s degree in media and communication from the London School of Economics and Political Science, and a bachelor’s degree from the College of William and Mary.
Scott HoweScott Howe is the Chief Executive Officer of LiveRamp (NYSE: RAMP), a software-as-a-service (SaaS) company that provides the identity platform for powering exceptional experiences. LiveRamp is the largest provider of identity resolution services, serving more than 1,000 companies across a broad range of sectors including brands, agencies, technology vendors, data providers, and publishers.From 2011 to Sept. 2018, Howe served as CEO and president of LiveRamp’s former parent company, Acxiom—a technology and services company dedicated to providing the data foundation for the world’s best marketers.
Throughout his tenure, Acxiom won countless industry awards and accolades, including recognition for the industry’s Best Innovation, Partner of the Year by the one of the world’s largest financial services companies and Supplier of the Year by the world’s largest retailer. In 2014, Fast Company named Howe one of the world’s Most Creative People.Before taking the reins at Acxiom in 2011, Howe held executive roles at Microsoft and aQuantive, where his teams built the world’s largest digital agency (Avenue A|Razorfish); pioneered people-based media buying (DRIVE Performance Media, aka the Microsoft Media Network); and developed the systems utilized for ad serving and attribution (Atlas International). He began his career at The Boston Consulting Group and Kidder, Peabody & Company, Inc.
When he’s not helping LiveRamp deploy the world’s most advanced and trusted offline and digital identity resolution technologies, Howe can be found serving as scout master for Troop 28 in Burlingame, Calif., canvassing the country in his refurbished 1956 vintage Airstream trailer or designing and building furniture in his garage workshop. A native of Milwaukee, he is a proud fan and part owner of the Green Bay Packers.Scott graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University with a degree in economics, and earned an MBA from Harvard University. He most recently served on the board of directors of Blue Nile, the largest online retailer of certified diamonds and fine jewelry, and is a former director of the Internet Advertising Bureau (IAB) and Turn, Inc., a digital advertising company.
Jia HyunJia Hyun is a global marketing and digital strategy executive with a 20-year record of driving marketing innovation to generate double-digit revenue growth for Fortune 500 firms, including LinkedIn, GE Capital, Citigroup, American Express, and MasterCard International. She is a strategic leader who has created and led digital transformation initiatives, built ecommerce capabilities, and orchestrated integrated marketing teams programs and data strategies across multi-national marketing organizations.
As Vice President, Jia currently leads the sales and client services teams across North America for LinkedIn’s $2B advertising business. Jia holds a Master of Business Administration with a concentration in Marketing and Information Systems from New York University. She lives in New York with her husband and 2 boys. She is an enthusiastic amateur pickle maker and prolific home cook who balances her love of food with adventure, singing, and dancing.
Julie JacobsJulie Jacobs is General Counsel of Yahoo.
Julie has over two decades of experience in the global media technology industry. She is a proven leader who identifies strategic business priorities and effectively executes against them while promoting organizational culture and values and protecting consumer and company interests. In her current role, she led the integration of the Yahoo and AOL Legal Departments following the acquisition of Yahoo and is responsible for all Legal, Regulatory, Privacy and Compliance matters for Verizon Media.
Norm JohnstonNorm’s career in digital marketing began in 1995 at Modem Media, the agency that placed the first banner ad. He later launched Modem’s first international operation in London, assuming the role of President in 2004. He later joined Mindshare where he eventually became Global Chief Digital Officer, Global Chief Strategy Officer and CEO of FAST, the agency’s search and programmatic specialist division.
In 2018, Norm was named Global CEO of Unruly where he managed a premium video marketplace with 1.2b in worldwide user reach and ten offices around the globe. In 2020, Norm sold the Unruly business to Tremor International, where he is now a non-executive board director.
Norm is currently the Global Head of Advertising Strategy at News Corp, owner of The Times of London and the Wall Street Journal. When it comes to talking about all things digital, Norm’s expertise has been featured by the BBC, MSNBC, Sky News, The Economist, the Financial Times, the New York Times and all major trade publications. His first book, ‘Adaptive Marketing’, was published by Palgrave MacMillan in 2015. He lives in London with his wife and family.
Craig KostelicCraig Kostelic is chief business officer, revenue at Condé Nast, heading up all advertising sales across the Condé Nast portfolio.
Kostelic most recently served as the chief business officer of The Lifestyle Collection, including The Food Innovation Group (Bon Appétit and Epicurious), Architectural Digest, Condé Nast Traveler and SELF, overseeing all revenue and brand development for the collection of brands.
Previously, Kostelic served as head of revenue and head of digital for The Food Innovation Group. Under his sales and digital leadership, The Food Innovation Group hit record highs in terms of revenue, profitability and digital audience growth. Prior to his role at the Food Innovation Group, Kostelic also served as digital advertising director at Condé Nast Traveler, where he was responsible for all digital revenue streams and oversaw the launch of CNTraveler.com.
Before joining Conde Nast, Kostelic worked at Google where he was responsible for developing and managing national strategic sales for Mobile Display within the automotive vertical. Prior to Google, Craig held numerous sales and marketing roles at Microsoft and Johnson & Johnson.
Daryl LeeDaryl Lee is the Global CEO of IPG Mediabrands, the media and marketing solutions division of Interpublic Group (NYSE: IPG), made up of the network’s best-in-class global media agencies UM and Initiative, and a portfolio of innovative marketing specialist companies, namely Reprise, Magna, Orion, Rapport, Healix, Mediabrands Content Studio and the IPG Media Lab. In his role, Lee is responsible for the strategic and commercial leadership and performance of the Mediabrands global network.
Lee has held a series of roles with increasing responsibility at IPG. Most recently, he was the global CEO of UM, revolutionizing the agency into an award-winning global powerhouse with a roster of iconic and fast-growing clients. Relentlessly client focused, Lee fostered a culture at UM that believes “Better Science and Better Art delivers Better Outcomes.” His inclusive leadership style fueled UM’s momentum, resulting in countless new and expanded client relationships with globally recognized brands including American Express, BMW, Coca-Cola, Johnson & Johnson, Sony and Spotify.
Lee’s strategic vision positioned UM at the forefront of media transformation, attaining industry leader status on Forrester’s first-ever Wave report on the media agency landscape in 2018. Lee originally joined UM in 2006, as the Head of Global Strategy. During that time, he built the Communications Planning Practice across global clients including Coca-Cola, Johnson & Johnson, MasterCard, Microsoft and Sony. He then joined McCann Worldgroup as Chief Integration Architect, eventually becoming Global Chief Strategy Officer responsible for working across all McCann offices to ensure clients received integrated brand solutions customized to their business challenges. In 2013, Lee returned to UM in the role of Global CEO.
Prior to IPG, Lee spent six years at Ogilvy, where he was Group Director of the Marketing Strategy Group and the 360 Strategy Director for the global IBM account. Lee began his career as a consultant for McKinsey & Company in the New York office.
Lee’s career is driven by his passion for marketing, endless curiosity, respect for the power of storytelling and commitment to positive social change. He is a vocal champion for diversity, equity and inclusion in the world and the workplace. He currently sits on the board of the economic empowerment non-profit STRIVE and is a former board member of the Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation (GLAAD). Daryl is also on the Board of Directors of Effie Worldwide, sits on the Facebook Client Council and Twitter Influence Council and has been a juror for multiple awards including the inaugural Creative Effectiveness Cannes Lions.
Daryl graduated with a D. Phil from the University of Oxford, which he attended as a Rhodes Scholar, and in 2016 was named Executive of the Year by AdWeek and was honored by Advertising Age as a Media Maven for 2015.
Helen LinA catalyst of innovation, a pioneer in programmatic, a collaborative industry partner, and fierce champion for diversity and inclusion, Helen Lin is Chief Digital Officer for Publicis Media.
Helen oversees digital strategy, partnerships, investment and negotiations on behalf of Publicis globally, represents the Groupe in industry-leading initiatives including improving digital brand safety standards and the overall safety on today’s largest consumer platforms. Helen enables our clients including Disney, Verizon, Kellogg’s, Lowes, Coty, GSK, and many others, to remain at the forefront of the rapidly, evolving digital ecosystem.
Helen’s professional focus goes beyond client & agency work. She is the founding Executive Sponsor of Publicis Media’s Women’s Business Resource Group POW! (Power of Women!), and on the board of Asians in ADCOLOR. She is also an active board member for Partnership with Children, a non-profit that helps over 10,000 NYC school children overcome the stresses of growing up in poverty. Helen earned her bachelor’s degree at UCLA and her MBA at NYU Stern.
Rob MasterRob Master is Vice President of Media and Digital Engagement for North America at Unilever. He oversees a team responsible for media innovation, strategy and the development of integrated communication plans for all Unilever brands. Under Rob’s leadership Unilever has been recognized as Digital Marketer of the Year by Advertising Age, Media Client of the Year by Media Post and one of Fast Company’s Most Innovative Marketers.
Rob joined Unilever in 2002 as a brand marketer, managing a number of the company’s iconic brands, including Dove and Axe, and driving award-winning branding campaigns.
Prior to joining Unilever, Rob worked in brand marketing for PepsiCo’s Taco Bell and for various communication agencies, as well as two start-ups.
He holds a B.A. in political science from the University of Wisconsin at Madison and an M.B.A. from the Olin School of Business at Washington University in St. Louis.
Kirk McDonaldOne of the “50 vital leaders in tech, media and marketing,” according to Adweek, Kirk is the CEO of GroupM North America (NA) where he leads 6,500 people passionate about shaping the next era of media where advertising works better for people. A member of GroupM’s Global Leadership Team, he is a key player in championing GroupM’s strategy to work with agency and GroupM leadership in the region to use its scale in providing more powerful and effective solutions for clients through the development of technology-enabled services.
With $17.6 billion in media investment billings across the U.S. and Canada, GroupM owns a 22% market share in the world’s largest region. Kirk is particularly driven to help GroupM lead the way in driving real change across the industry to find a new balance of making advertising less interruptive and a valued part of the media experience. He also believes that, as the desire for brands to play their part in leading the way toward real change grows stronger, GroupM is the one to help clients be authentic and bold in this moment. Kirk served as the Global CEO of Choreograph, and was responsible for launching WPP’s global data company which brought together over 700 technologists, product developers, and data scientists. Kirk and Choreograph focused on helping marketers and brands realize the value of their first party data in the fast-changing data landscape.
Kirk joined GroupM from WarnerMedia’s Xandr where he most recently served as Chief Business Officer in charge of the go to market functions including sales, communications, product marketing, and marketing strategy and execution after holding the role of Chief Marketing Officer for nearly two years. Prior to AT&T, Kirk was President of PubMatic, the marketing automation software company, and held roles with Time Inc., Fortune|Money Group and CNET Networks, among others.
Throughout his career, Kirk received many accolades including being named to Ebony Magazine’s Power 100 list in 2018, Adweek’s 2014 “12 Stars of Ad Tech Who are Building the Future of the Industry Right Now’ list and Business Insider’s 2014 “The 46 Most Important African-Americans in Technology” list, among others. Kirk is a founding member of the Black Executive CMO Alliance (BECA). He currently serves on the Board of Directors for Elanco (NYSE: ELAN), and is a member of the prestigious Executive Leadership Council. Healso serves on several other professional and not-for-profit boards including the Ad Council, Advertising Week Advisory Council, and is the co-chair of MOUSE/CI.
Alan MossAlan Moss is Vice President, Global Advertising Sales at Amazon. His efforts are focused on helping businesses around the world engage customers and build their brands.
Prior to Amazon, Alan spent 13 years at Google, where he most recently served as Vice President of Professional Services supporting advertisers and publishers globally. Other roles included leading Google’s largest U.S. customer sales sector, as well as its Americas mid-market sales organization.
Alan has also held leadership positions at other technology and internet-based companies, including PayPal, ChartOne, Inc., GoTo Shopping (acquired by Yahoo!), CareTools, Wang Laboratories, Microsoft, and LEK Consulting.
Alan earned a bachelor’s degree from Dartmouth College and an MBA from Harvard Business School. He lives in the Bay Area with his wife, Kirsten, and their son and two daughters.
Nicolle PangisAs Ampersand CEO, Nicolle Pangis and her team are working to build a smarter, more effective television ecosystem by empowering brands to seamlessly connect with audiences wherever and whenever they watch TV. Pangis previously served as Global COO at GroupM’s [m]PLATFORM where she led global product management, strategic partnerships and technology development across the largest media investment management organization in the world. Prior to [m]PLATFORM, Pangis was a central figure in the success of pioneering programmatic advertising company, Xaxis, serving first as Global Chief Revenue Officer, followed by Global COO. Earlier, she was President of 24/7 Real Media where she led the company’s business in North America and Europe. Nicolle is a member of the Ad Council Board of Directors and has been named to the Adweek 50 list, AdAge’s 40 Under 40, Crain’s 40 Under 40, and Multichannel News’ Women to Watch. She was recently awarded AdExchanger’s 2020 Leadership in Advertising award. She received her bachelor’s degree in communication from Boston University and her MBA from Rutgers University.
Shenan ReedAdvertising Executive, digital media entrepreneur and public speaker, Shenan is a highly sought-after thought leader, regularly presenting at major advertising and digital media industry conferences. Her insights and opinions have been cited in The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, AdAge, MediaPost, Huffington Post, AdWeek and Women’s Wear Daily. Her deep understanding of advertising, media and analytics has mandated her inclusion on several advisory boards including Pinterest, AdLedger, Namely, Teads and Style Coalition.
Joy RobinsJoy Robins is Chief Revenue Officer at The Washington Post. Robins joined The Post after five and a half years at Quartz, most recently serving as Global Chief Revenue Officer. There she led the company to triple digit growth while holding senior positions including SVP Global Revenue and Strategy and Vice President of Advertising and Strategy.
Before joining Quartz, Robins was a senior director at NBC News Digital and Vice President of digital advertising at BBC Worldwide. Her early career included positions at The Weather Channel and OMD.
Robins sits on the Board of Directors of the Ad Council, IAB and the DCN. In 2018, Robins was named one of the industry insiders solving digital advertising’s problems by Business Insider, and in 2017 she was recognized by Ad Age’s 40 under 40.
Robins graduated from Rutgers University.
Scott RosenbergScott joined Roku in 2012 as Vice President of Advertising to develop and lead the company’s advertising business and was promoted in 2017 to GM and SVP of Advertising. In late 2017 he became GM of Platform Business overseeing both advertising and content and services. Before joining Roku, Scott co-founded and served as CEO of Umami Co, a companion TV mobile application company. Prior, Scott served as Vice President of Advanced Advertising at Rovi Corporation, where he led advertising sales. He also served as Director of Product Management at BlackArrow, Inc., a TV ad serving technology company. Earlier in his career, Scott held product and engineering roles focused on advertising and video technologies at Replay TV, Analog Devices and Intel Corporation. Scott holds a bachelor’s degree. in Computer Science from Princeton University and was a Fulbright Fellow to Japan. He also holds a master’s degree in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and an M.B.A. from the Sloan School at MIT.
Speaking experienceScott is a regular on the speaking circuit, participating in conferences including Advertising Week, IAB Digital Newfronts, SXSW, NATPE, Video Ad Summit, On Demand Summit and many more.
Doug RozenAs CEO of dentsu Media across the Americas, Doug supports 3,000+ of the most forward-thinking media experts (across Carat, iProspect, dentsu X, 360i, Amplifi and more) who every day strive to deliver like never before. Known for exploiting the intersection of data, technology, and creativity to help modern marketers champion progress, Doug has been recognized for leading businesses through digital transformation and fortunate to be a part of numerous industry firsts.
Doug most recently served as the first Chief Media Officer at award-winning agency 360i, where he helped them become a Forrester leader, MediaPost Agency of the Year, and win over 20 new clients. He joined 360i from OMD, where he led all digital and innovation activities and drove client relationships with Apple, Hasbro, Eli Lilly, Disney, among others. Before OMD, Doug served as Chief Innovation Officer and SVP, General Manager at Meredith, where he led mobile and social activity, oversaw new products, and ran the entertainment client portfolio. Prior to Meredith, Doug was SVP at Carlson Marketing, where he developed and managed the global loyalty provider’s agency services unit including, creative, media, mobile, social, and strategy offerings. While there, he also helped in its acquisition by Aimia. Doug also served as Senior Partner and Managing Director at JWT, where he established[email protected]and combined it with JWT’s direct and data offerings to form[email protected]This ultimately led to one of the top non-traditional agencies at its time. Doug’s prior experience includes many firsts: building the first intranet for a major auto OEM, designing the first online acquisition campaign for a national ISP, and streaming one of the first collegiate football games.
Doug is a cancer survivor and proud advocate for Stand Up to Cancer. He is an avid cyclist and currently lives in CT with his wife and two teenage children.
David SpectorDave Spector is the Co-Founder of ThirdLove, the 3rd largest online bra and underwear company in America. Dave has always been an entrepreneur, starting his first company in college and another during business school. Prior to founding ThirdLove, he focused on consumer internet, e-commerce, and analytics investing as a Partner at Sequoia Capital. One investment, in Stella & Dot, got him particularly interested in female-focused e-commerce. Before Sequoia, Dave was at IBM and Google, where he helped lead Google’s first efforts in commerce with the launch of Google Checkout, Product Search, and Google Analytics. Outside of ThirdLove, he’s an angel investor in two dozen companies and an advisor to others.
Dave has been recognized as: National Retail Federation Disruptors, Goldman Sachs’ 100 Most Intriguing Entrepreneurs and EY Entrepreneur of the Year in Northern California. He is also a certified pilot and enthusiastically very unaccomplished as a triathlete.
Nada StirrattNada C. Stirratt is the Vice President, North America, Global Business Group for Meta. Prior to Meta, Nada served as the Chief Executive Officer of Verve Wireless, Inc., a provider of SaS-location-based mobile advertising solutions for retail, auto, CPG, restaurants, and other drive-to-retail brand advertisers.
Nada also previously served as Chief Revenue Officer and Executive Vice President for Acxiom, the data-mining and analytics company. In this role, Nada led all of the client-facing areas of the business, including field, account management, and consulting across the globe.
Stirratt came to Acxiom with a proven track record of delivering transformational business results. Prior to Acxiom, she served as Chief Revenue Officer at MySpace, where she led global sales, strategy and advertising operations. Previously, Nada served as Executive Vice President of digital advertising at MTV Networks, where she successfully led the company’s aggressive expansion into the digital advertising arena across all properties, overseeing advertising sales, strategy and operations.
Earlier in her career, Nada was senior vice president and general manager of advertising sales at Advertising.com and also held senior positions with some of the world’s most well-known brands, including AOL, Moviefone, Hearst Publications and Condé Nast. Stirratt holds a bachelor’s degree in advertising from the University of Illinois. She is based in New York City.
John TrimbleJohn Trimble serves as the Chief Advertising Revenue Officer of SiriusXM, where he is responsible for all advertising revenue, strategic sales marketing, and advertising operations for SiriusXM, Pandora, Stitcher and Adswizz. Throughout his 11 years at SXM, he was part of the management team that built Pandora from a Start Up into the public markets and most recently combined the assets of SiriusXM into the advertising brand, SXM Media. SXM Media’s diverse revenue streams tap satellite, podcasting and streaming audio that reach consumers in their cars as well as on their computers, mobile phones, and consumer electronic devices. Prior to SiriusXM, John held several senior level roles overseeing Sales at Glam Media, Fox Interactive Media, and Phase 2 Media.
John received his BA from St. Lawrence University. He currently sits on the Interactive Advertising Board and the Mobile Media Association Board. He is also on the Board of the Danny Butler Memorial Fund and St. Vincent’s Hospital in Harrison, NY. He resides in Rye, New York with his wife, Maggie, and their four children, Molly, Jack, Colin, and Libby.
Lisa ValentinoLisa recently joined Disney as EVP, Client & Brand Solutions reporting to President, Rita Ferro. Lisa and her division is challenged with architecting next generation partnerships rooted in insights, integrated content marketing, and digital for the multi-billion dollar company. Previously, Lisa was Executive Vice President of Revenue Innovation for Univision Communications Inc. (UCI), the leading media company serving Hispanic America. Valentino led UCI’s digital, integrated marketing and revenue teams to develop strategy and activation for customer solutions. Prior to joining UCI, Valentino worked at Condé Nast where she served as Chief Revenue Officer, overseeing growth as well as strategic planning to accelerate new revenue growth and transform Condé Nast from a publisher to a client led media partner and brand storyteller. Prior to Condé Nast, Valentino worked at ESPN where she oversaw a division responsible for over $1 billion in revenue focused on multimedia partnerships across the Company’s portfolio, including domestic and international TV, digital, events, and print. She also managed all digital and mobile ad sales revenue for the company in her first 3 years with the company. Valentino graduated from Lafayette College with dual degrees in English and Art History and played D1 soccer. She currently resides in Westchester and is wife to Ami and mother to Liam (9) and Olivia (7).
Julie Van UllenJulie Van Ullen is the Managing Director for US and Canada for Rakuten Marketing. In her role, Julie is responsible for overseeing the commercial organization selling and supporting the holistic suite of Rakuten Marketing’s affiliate and performance marketing solutions for Brands, Agencies, and Publishers. Additionally, Julie drives the strategy and vision related to all aspects of go-to-market for Rakuten’s Affiliate+ (data, prospecting, retargeting, social, search) offerings. Prior to joining Rakuten Marketing, Julie was the Vice President of Digital, for FreeWheel. In her role, she served as digital segment GM to oversee product vision, client acquisition, and overall go-to-market strategy for FreeWheel’s suite of video ad serving and monetization solutions. Before FreeWheel, Julie served as Vice President of Publisher Solutions at premium ad exchange, OpenX, overseeing the Sales function for the East Coast and before that as Vice President of Member Services at the IAB where she was responsible for attracting new members and developing a portfolio of opportunities and initiatives to keep current members engaged. As a part of serving IAB’s membership, Julie oversaw IAB’s elite Committees and Councils, charged with putting industry best practices and thought leadership into the marketplace. Those focal areas included Native, Programmatic, Digital Video, AdvancedTV, Digital Audio, Social Media, and Gaming.
Prior to making her transition to the digital space, Julie was an Editor at The Taunton Press in the books division of Fine Woodworking and Fine Homebuilding and still enjoys furniture-making in her free time. When not on the job, ex-opera singer Julie sings with the classic rock cover band.
Deborah WahlDeborah Wahl was appointed General Motors Global Chief Marketing Officer (CMO) on Sept. 1, 2019. She previously served as the Global CMO of Cadillac, where she guided the directional shift of the brands’ look and feel – with bright visuals and heavy hitting anthems. She also took the brand to new places like ComplexCon, the PGA, and launched aggressive campaigns to bring customers to showrooms, like XT4 – 4TX. Rooted firmly in the school of performance marketing, she always drives her teams to use data to change how they seek and engage with consumers. Prior to joining General Motors, Deborah served as the Senior Vice President and CMO for McDonald’s from 2014 to 2017, where she played a key role in the brand’s turnaround. In addition to McDonald’s, Deborah has held a number of CMO and Vice President positions, including at PulteGroup , Chrysler and Lexus. Deborah earned a bachelor’s degree in Economics from Wellesley College and an MBA from The Wharton School. She also has a master’s degree from The Lauder Institute, University of Pennsylvania. Forbes named her to its Most Influential CMO list in 2018 and 2019, and she was recognized as one of 2019 AdWeek 50 Marketing and Tech Execs. Deborah is an active business leader who serves on the boards of Groupon, Mediaocean and The Mobile Marketing Association (MMA), as well as on the Board of Trustees of Cranbrook Educational Community.
Rob WilkRob Wilk leads the advertising team at Microsoft and is responsible for building and scaling Microsoft’s search/native advertising offerings with nearly $10 billion in revenue annually. Rob manages the sales, marketing, operations, retail media and partnerships teams with more than 2,000 employees across the globe.
Rob has 25 years of advertising and media experience with the majority specifically focused on digital media and paid search on both the agency and publisher sides. Before joining Microsoft, Rob was the founding Vice President of Sales at Foursquare, responsible for building the sales team and leading sales initiatives across the Foursquare brand and agency partners. Prior to Foursquare, Rob worked at Yahoo leading a team of US- and Canada-based employees tasked with driving optimal paid search performance for Yahoo’s biggest advertisers with yearly revenue of $1 billion. He oversaw the field search account management team, the global search account management team and the award-winning search optimization and strategy team.
Rob is a nationally recognized media expert and has spoken at Cannes, Advertising Week, Search Engine Strategies Conference, Search Marketing Expo Conference, Search Insider Summits and many more. He also actively serves on the board of SCOPE, anorganization that provides summer camp scholarships to children from underserved communities.
Joe ZawadzkiMediaMath’s CEO Joe Zawadzki has spent his career redefining the marketing and advertising industries through software and data sciences. He has created and scaled companies with a combined $2B in market value, personally invested in a range of start-ups and is sought after for his vision on the future of technology.
Throughout his career representing marketers at top-tier agencies and Fortune 500 companies such as AOL, American Express, IAC, Verizon and Vonage, Joe has focused on the integration of media, data and data sciences, in software. That reached its peak with the founding of MediaMath in 2007, a company credited with starting the programmatic revolution with the first demand-side platform. MediaMath’s offering, centered around the TerminalOne software, powers the marketing practice of more than 3,500 brands worldwide.
Prior to MediaMath, Joe was Founder, President and Chairman of Poindexter Systems / [x+1] a pure-play marketing optimization enterprise, where he helped found and incubate Right Media, which sold to Yahoo! in 2007. He has been an active champion of digital media and the broader NYC startup ecosystem, having made investments in over 50 companies including 33Across, Accordant, AppNexus, CreditKarma, DataMinr, Electronifi, Integral Ad Science, Namely, Optoro, Sourcepoint, and Vistar Media.
Joe serves on the Executive Committee and Board of the Direct Marketing Association, an almost century-old trade association focused on serving the interests of consumers and brands through data-driven marketing, and of Hope for Vision, an organization dedicated to raising money for the development of treatments and cures for blinding diseases, with particular focus on retinal degenerative diseases.
He is a graduate of Harvard University and was a Teaching Fellow in cosmology, set theory and the history of science. He lives in New York City with his wife, Daria, and their children Dune and Jack.
David CohenDavid Cohen joined IAB in April 2020 as President and was named Chief Executive Officer in September 2020. Cohen is a widely respected advertising agency leader who, prior to IAB, served as President, North America for MAGNA, Interpublic Group’s (IPG) centralized media intelligence, investment, and innovation arm. In this role, Cohen was responsible for more than $20 billion in media spend. During his tenure, Cohen structured and executed large global transactions on behalf of IPG and its clients, with such major IAB member companies as Facebook, Google, Microsoft, Spotify, Twitter, and Verizon Media.
Prior to MAGNA, Cohen served as Chief Investment Officer of UM, ensuring that digital innovation, data, and technology acumen flowed throughout the agency to drive performance. From 2001 to 2011, Cohen served in critical, transformational roles at UM during the explosive growth of digital advertising, including Chief Media Officer, Chief Digital Officer, and Executive Vice President, U.S. Director of Digital Communications. In the late 1990’s, Cohen was responsible for launching and building IPG’s digital practice.
Cohen has a long history of working with trade organizations including IAB and 4As, where he served as chairman of the Interactive Marketing Committee from 2009-2013. He has also been instrumental in initiating several vital industry-wide programs, including the Future of Television, facilitated by EY. Cohen is a Queens native, with a bachelor’s degree in communications from Adelphi University. He was recognized by Adweek as a “Media All Star” and was part of the “Adweek 50” in 2012.
In 2016, David was elected to the Board of Directors of Partnership with Children a non-profit whose mission is to strengthen the emotional, social, and cognitive skills of vulnerable children in New York City to help them succeed in school, society, and life.
David enjoys spending time with his wife and two teenage daughters. A self-described gadget-geek and sometimes fitness fanatic – he ran the NYC Marathon in 2014 and 2019 and Boston Marathon in 2016.
Anthony KatsurAnthony Katsur is a media technology veteran with more than twenty-five years of executive leadership and technical experience at innovative technology companies in the digital media industry.
Most recently, Anthony was SVP, Strategy, Operations and Corporate Development at Nexstar Media Group, Inc., the largest local broadcaster in the United States. Anthony was responsible for overseeing strategy, technology platforms and corporate development across Nexstar’s portfolio of digital assets.
Prior to Nexstar, Anthony served as President of Sonobi, where he implemented their product and go to market strategy around people-based marketing. Anthony recruited, and led highly effective teams while driving strategic partnerships with leading media companies, agencies and brands.
Prior to Sonobi, Anthony held global leadership roles at Rubicon Project as EVP of Business Operations and General Manager of Buyer Cloud. He also held global executive roles at MediaMath and Maxifier, where he served as CEO. Earlier in his career, he joined DoubleClick via the acquisition of NetGravity where he lead multiple engineering divisions and also fulfilled several product leadership and general management roles.
Anthony is an active participant at industry conferences, speaking about the latest ends in advertising at the National Association of Broadcasters, AdAge’s Brand Summit, Advertising Week, Broadcasting & Cable, AdMonsters and GABBCON. He has been quoted on industry trends and provided thought leadership in The Wall Street Journal, AdAge, Adweek, AdExchanger, MediaPost, Econsultancy and Digiday, among others.
Randall RothenbergRandall Rothenberg is the Executive Chair of the Interactive Advertising Bureau, the trade association for digital media and marketing in the United States. Among the IAB’s 750 member companies are such major platforms as Google, Facebook, Microsoft, and Snap; the nation’s most important ad-supported media companies, including The New York Times, Walt Disney Co., NBC Universal, ViacomCBS, Hearst Magazines, Spotify, Verizon Media, Hulu, Warner Media, LinkedIn, and Meredith; incumbent and disruptor brands, including Coca-Cola, Walmart, Procter & Gamble, Hubble Contacts, ThirdLove, General Motors, Johnson & Johnson, and Citigroup; and scores of technology and data companies, among them Mediamath, LiveRamp, Quantcast, and Pubmatic.
With these members and its 47 affiliate associations on every inhabited continent, the IAB and its sister technology-standards group, the IAB Tech Lab, serve as the digital marketing industry’s public policy and lobbying organization, market and consumer research center, training and development base, and hub for the development of standards and best practices.
Mr. Rothenberg joined the IAB in January 2007 as President and Chief Executive Officer, and led the organization until becoming Executive Chair in September 2020. During his tenure, the organization became one of the largest and most influential media and marketing trade bodies in the world, helping to develop technical standards, self-regulation, government regulation, market and consumer research, and professional development programs to protect consumer privacy, foster brand and media revenue growth, improve data security, and reduce supply chain friction in the digital marketing industry.
Prior to his IAB role, Mr. Rothenberg was the Chief Marketing Officer and Senior Director of Intellectual Capital at Booz Allen Hamilton, the international strategy and technology consulting firm, where he oversaw business development, knowledge management, and thought leadership activities, and directed the award-winning quarterly business magazine strategy+business, Strategy+Business Books, www.strategy-business.com, and other electronic and print publications for senior business executives.
Earlier in his career, Mr. Rothenberg spent six years at The New York Times, where he was the technology editor and politics editor of the Sunday magazine, the daily advertising columnist, and a media and marketing reporter. For 10 years, he was a marketing and media columnist for Advertising Age. Mr. Rothenberg has written for a score of major national magazines, among them Esquire, GQ, The Nation, The New York Times Magazine, and New York Magazine. He is the author of four books, including Where the Suckers Moon: An Advertising Story (Alfred A. Knopf, 1994), a critically-acclaimed chronicle of the birth, evolution, and death of a single advertising campaign.
Mr. Rothenberg, an avid nature, urban, and portrait photographer, serves on the Board of Directors of the International Center of Photography and the Board of Overseers of the Columbia Journalism Review. He received an undergraduate degree in Classics from Princeton and lives in New York City.
Alia AbbasAlia Abbas is a strategy and operations executive with extensive global digital transformation experience supporting Fortune 500 companies across various sectors and geographies driving organizational effectiveness and alignment and overcoming and embracing market disruptions. Her expertise in strategic planning, operational excellence, and program and change management, coupled with her broad background and strong cross-functional experience has exposed her to a wide range of business situations, challenges, and workstyles over her two- decade career.
Most recently, Alia was the Head of Business Operations for the technology organization at The Estee Lauder Companies where she collaborated across global leadership teams and the broader organization to facilitate and develop their digital transformation strategy and operating model, and simplify, digitize, and integrate core business processes as ELC embarked on their digital customer experience transformation. Prior to that, Alia led the strategic planning and execution of Time Warner’s unprecedented enterprise-wide strategic and operational transformation efforts in support of the company’s digital initiatives.
She holds an MBA from Cornell University’s S.C. Johnson Graduate School of Management, an MS from Stevens Institute of Technology in Management Information Systems, and a BS in Computer Science from Drexel University. Alia is on the Board of Advisor’s at Seton Hall University’s Skillman School of Business Customer Experience Program, and on the Board of Trustees and DEI committee of Trailblazers Camp, a nonprofit that empowers youth to build life values through outdoor experiential programs. Alia is a native New York-er and avid traveler.
Sheryl GoldsteinA “net vet” with 20+ years of driving meaningful revenue through insights into action consultative selling in the dynamic digital landscape (Yahoo, AOL, About.com). Adept at building successful sales teams, developing go-to-market sales strategies and gaining consensus across company divisions. Experience includes mobile, tech (DSP, PMP, Exchange) and data driven solutions, social media and word of mouth marketing, Website development and design, online media and marketing and cross-platform media experience (TV, Radio and live-event). A passionate leader and relationship builder who is committed to exceeding goals and expectations for clients, her team and company.
Michael HahnMichael Hahn is Executive Vice President & General Counsel at IAB and IAB Tech Lab. Michael has responsibility for all legal matters, including the direction of legal strategy, privacy compliance, antitrust compliance, intellectual property rights issues, and general corporate matters. Michael is also responsible for serving as an advocate for the digital advertising industry on common legal issues affecting member companies.
Michael joined IAB and IAB Tech Lab from Lowenstein Sandler LLP where he served as Vice Chair of the firm’s Antitrust Practice Group. In that role, he provided clients with strategic counsel around competition, distribution and governance issues. In the area of litigation, Michael’s matters have included multiparty class action antitrust defense representation.
Michael served previously as Co-Chair of the New Jersey State Bar Association Antitrust Law Committee. He also previously served on the Editorial Advisory Board of Competition Law 360 and the Advisory Board of the American Bar Association Antitrust Section’s Civil Torts & RICO Committee. Michael frequently publishes on a range of legal and policy issues.
Michael earned his B.A. in History and Political Science from Rutgers University, M.P.P. from Georgetown University and J.D. for Georgetown University Law Center.
Carryl Pierre-DrewsCarryl Pierre-Drews is EVP, Chief Marketing Officer at the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB) where she is responsible for providing executive leadership and management of the IAB marketing and communications organization and activities to forward the IAB’s position as a digital, marketing, and media industry thought leader and agenda-setter. Carryl has stewardship of the IAB Brand inclusive of Events, Marketing, PR, Digital, Social, Mobile, Video, and Audio channels with the goal of elevating IAB’s profile with media and tech CEOs, CMOs, and the marketing and advertising industry at large.
Previously, Carryl held the title of Vice President of Marketing at Fullscreen, a next-gen social marketing agency, where she built and led the agency’s brand marketing, PR, digital/social channels, influencer engagements, and global industry activations featuring marketers from American Eagle, AT&T, HP, Marriott, Mars, Mattel, Visa and more. Carryl was instrumental in catalyzing key strategic decisions that drove business growth, elevated visibility, and increased shareholder value positioning Fullscreen for the AT&T acquisition in 2018 and eventual WarnerMedia integration in 2019. Prior to Fullscreen, Carryl was Senior Vice President of Strategic Marketing at USA Network, a division of NBCUniversal, where she led the integrated marketing, communications strategy, and client experiences teams.
Carryl serves as Chair of the Marketing & Communications Committee of Pet Partners Board of Directors, where she helps devise strategies to further communicate and expand the vital role of therapy animals in our lives. As a therapy animal team with her dog Mika, Carryl has seen firsthand the effect therapy animals have on overall health and well-being. Carryl is also passionate about creating a culture of inclusion and diversity in the advertising, marketing, and media industry and has been an active member of She Runs It, an organization invested in women’s achievement, for 19 years, with six spent on the Board (2012-2018). She was honored twice by CableFax Magazine as one of the most influential minorities in cable — in 2013 “The Leaders” and in 2012 “The Influentials.” In 2019 Carryl was nominated and became a founding member of Chief, a private network focused on connecting and supporting women leaders.
Lartease TiffithLartease Tiffith is the Executive Vice President for Public Policy at the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB). He leads IAB’s public policy team, which is responsible for advocating on behalf of IAB’s more than 700 member companies on complex issues, including consumer privacy, data security, global trade, international data transfer rules, and more. Lartease also leads IAB’s Public Policy Council, the marketing and media industry’s largest legislative and regulatory advisory group, with senior executives from more than 200 companies contributing to solutions to advance consumer benefits and economic growth. He also plays an important role in supporting IAB Tech Labs’ efforts to align the industry’s technical development and best practices.
Lartease joined IAB from Amazon, where he led the company’s public policy work around advertising, privacy, security, data governance, cross-border data flows, and consumer protection issues. In his role, he provided counsel to internal legal and business partners on global public policy matters to help guide the development of products, services, and internal policies. During his tenure at Amazon, INSIDER named him as one of the key players in politics and the tech world.
Prior to joining Amazon, Lartease served as Senior Counsel to then-U.S. Senator Kamala Harris, and Counsel to U.S. Senator Dianne Feinstein. Before working in the Senate, he practiced law at two international law firms (Kirkland & Ellis LLP and O’Melveny & Myers LLP) and the U.S. Department of Justice. Lartease began his legal career as a Law Clerk to the Honorable Roger L. Gregory, Circuit Judge, on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit.
Lartease earned his B.A., J.D., and M.B.A. from Northwestern University.
Jeanie CarstensenJeanie Carstensen is the Senior Vice President, Finance and Operations of Finance and Operations. She joined the IAB in October 2015 with 20+ years experience in the media and entertainment industries. Most recently she was with Comcast/NBCUniversal as a strategic finance and administration leader supporting the Cable Ad Sales Division. Prior to that she held finance leadership roles at Viacom/MTV Networks in New York and MTV Europe in London, England.
Jeanie holds a BA in Finance from Iona College, is an avid traveler, and volunteers with Monday Night Hospitality serving restaurant style meals to those in need.
Rick BergerRick has significant experience across all sides of the marketing ecosystem including brand management, agency, media, digital, ad tech, data, analytics, and attribution. He started his career working on blue chip brands for several major NY ad agencies and then transitioned to the brand side at L’Oreal. After a successful stint launching and managing haircare brands, Rick took on a role running sales for Next Generation Radio, an industry association charged with generating new on-air and digital revenue. In nine years, NGR generated over $125M in new sales to the industry. After leaving NGR, Rick ran the NY Sales office for Alloy, helping to launch the largest teen ad network. Rick has also run sales teams at Music Mogul (a music start-up), Interactive One (a multi-cultural publisher), Specific Media/Viant (the largest ad network) and inPowered (a native platform). Most recently, Rick has been with Conversant, the identity platform and digital arm of Epsilon. In this role, Rick has been the lead revenue generator for Conversant’s emerging Restaurant segment.
Craig ColemanCraig Coleman joins IAB with over 15 years of expertise developing marketing programs, messaging, and positioning strategies for IAB member brands such as USA TODAY, NBCUniversal, and MTV. He is excited to raise the profile of the IAB brand and positioning IAB as the industry thought leader in media and marketing.
Most recently, Coleman was VP, Client Solutions and Product Marketing for Gannett Digital and USA TODAY where he led digital product marketing and client solutions. Under his leadership, USA TODAY launched the award winning Gravity unit and introduced digital partnerships in virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR).
In previous roles, Coleman served as Vice President, Marketing for Screenvision where he launched a new branded content offering combining media, movie studio and partner assets. While at NBCUniversal, he was brand manager of the lifestyle brands Green is Universal, Healthy at NBCU and Hispanics at NBCU and oversaw the development and implementation of integrated ad sales marketing programs for advertisers across NBCUniversal’s portfolio including the first-ever movie studio program with Sony. Prior to joining NBCUniversal in 2010, Coleman directed all marketing and communications for the fastest growing kid’s network, Nicktoons Network. Coleman also co-produced the Nicktoons Network Animation Festival driving festival submissions and partnerships with LEGO, Addicting Games and mtvU making it the largest animation festival in North America.
Coleman earned a Bachelor’s degree from University of Connecticut, and currently resides in CT with his wife, Evan, and daughter, Bennett.
Libby MorganLibby Morgan comes to IAB with over twenty years of agency and consulting experience, spending most of her career at the intersection of Marketing, Technology and Innovation. Most recently, she served as the Global President of MRM Commerce, where she launched the Strategy, Consulting, and Digital Transformation practice. Previous positions also include President of The Born Group, where she focused on Digital Marketing, Commerce and Content, and Managing Director of iCrossing (part of Hearst), where she focused on Media and Digital Marketing. Throughout her career, she has had the good fortune to partner with clients such as Nestle, General Motors, Anheuser Busch, American Express, and Geico, among others, to help them achieve their business goals through interactive solutions.
Shailley SinghShailley brings several years of product management experience in Digital advertising at Yahoo and Say Media building products for Mobile advertising, Ad Operations, Targeting solutions and integrating data platforms. Shailley has supported and worked with multiple IAB initiatives in the past namely MRAID and Mobile Rising Stars specifications. At Yahoo, he worked on creating innovative ad experiences for mobile and tablet platforms as well as native formats. Shailley has a diverse background as a product leader, consultant and entrepreneur building and sustaining high performing teams at both large organizations as well as venture funded startups like Paypal, Yahoo, Say Media, Serus, Accenture, PwC. By way of qualifications, Shailley has an MBA and Chemical engineering degree.
Alexandra SalomonAlexandra Salomon joined the IAB Tech Lab in 2018 to lead global business development efforts for the organization, spearheading growth around the world and across the value chain. After heading up International for the Interactive Advertising Bureau for 5 years, she brings more than 25 years of business development and global marketing experience to the team, including two decades specifically in Digital.
A veteran in online advertising and interactive marketing, Salomon has worked for leading brands such as AOL, Yahoo, Zinio, and Disney Publishing. She was born in the U.K, grew up in France, and is not only multi-lingual but truly multicultural.
Angelina EngA seasoned executive with 24+ years of digital media, marketing and operations experience, Angelina Eng has focused her career on supporting agencies and brands to define, build and manage digital media and marketing efforts while enabling teams to operationally work efficiently and effectively with both internal and external partners and platforms. She’s been responsible for the development and management of internal systems and workflow, establishment of deliverable standards, designing ad trafficking and tracking guidelines, implementation of emerging platforms, as well as establishing best practices at companies such as Morgan Stanley, Merkle, Dentsu Aegis and Publicis Modem.
Over the years, She has been involved with multiple organizations and events to help define, establish and advocate some of the industry standards that we see in today’s digital media ecosystem (such as ad verification/brand safety, ad fraud, viewability and programmatic, social, etc)Angelina has been awarded the AdMonsters 2018 Power List, IAB Data Rockstar 2016 and AdMonsters Digital Media Leadership Award 2016.
Amber MuratAmber is the Vice President of Human Resources for IAB. She stepped into the role in May 2022 and has oversight of the organization’s human resource functions, including culture, diversity, inclusion, and all people-focused initiatives.
Amber is an Equity Designer, People Strategist, and an Authentic People & Culture leader. Amber joins IAB with 15 years of experience; in Human Resources leadership roles within nonprofit, mission-driven organizations. She brings a unique mix of human resources, executive coaching, and thought leadership expertise.
Most recently, Amber was the Head of People & Culture at Sollis Health, where she launched the company’s first-ever human resources strategy and led the organization through a culture transformation. She holds a master’s degree in Human Resources Development from Fordham University, a senior professional human resources designation, and multiple professional coaching certifications from iPEC & IIN. In 2020, Disruptor Magazine named Amber one of the Top 30 Life Coaches to Look Out For in 2021.
Eric JohnEric John leads IAB’s Media Center, a dedicated unit within the IAB whose mission is to simplify the video supply chain, providing best practices and education for brands, agencies, and media companies to drive continued growth through the evolving convergence of television and digital video. Eric drives the center’s efforts in the development of market-making research, industry standards and best practices and buyer/seller terms and conditions. Before joining the IAB, Eric led digital services and strategy at the Alliance for Audited Media and the MPA. Eric also served as global director of publisher marketing at Nokia, managing the company’s world-wide mobile app developer ecosystem. Prior to Nokia, Eric launched and led advertiser brand engagement solutions for Yahoo!, creating advanced, data-driven video, mobile and interactive campaigns for brands such as Pepsi, Loreal and Nikon. Eric began his career in internet advertising at DoubleClick (Google) where he served in business and product development within the DART for Publishers (DFP) and DART for Advertisers (DFA) business units where he launched the industry’s first post-click “Spotlight” measurement tools. Eric is an alumnus of Miami of Ohio (BA) and Indiana University (MA) and is a graduate of Columbia University’s Product Management Program.
Read articles by Eric John.
Zoe SoonZoe Soon has 10+ years of experience building products in technology-driven businesses with a heavy focus on mobile. Six years ago Zoe flew 21 hours from Sydney to NYC for a 30min coffee meeting which led to her first job in NYC. Since then she’s worked with three major New York based media companies, The New York Times, Condé Nast and Business Insider on projects ranging from location-based apps to paywalls. Zoe began her career as a user researcher and UX design consultant working with three of the top five banks in Australia. She was then hired to establish a user insights practice at Fairfax Media, a leading Australian news and media conglomerate. Here she led the user research for the flagship news apps which won Best Mobile News Product at the 2012 Australian Mobile Awards and went on to become product lead for the news sites. In this role she launched a content paywall and a unified user data system to diversify revenue and enable more targeted marketing.
Prior to joining the IAB Zoe was General Manager of apps and email at Business Insider where she was charged with defining the go-to market strategy for these platforms. In this role Zoe launched Insider Inc’s first OTT apps across Apple, Amazon Fire and Roku offering advertisers cross-platform video digital distribution and access to an audience that generates over 2 billion views each month.
Zoe has a Masters in Organizational Psychology and lives in New York. She enjoys burning pancakes, Cuban salsa dancing and talking to strangers in line.
Chris BruderleChris Bruderle brings over 20 years of experience in Data/Web Analytics and Media Market Research at premium Digital and Muti-Platform web publishers including The Daily Beast, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, Conde Nast Publications and This Old House Ventures.
Most recently, Chris was VP, Analytics & Research at The Daily Beast where he spent nearly 7 years and was responsible for the tracking, analysis and reporting of The Daily Beast’s O&O site and off-platform data/analytics for Senior/Corporate Management, Editorial, Advertising Sales, Product/Engineering, Audience/Business Development, Social Media and PR. He established the company-wide Editorial Analytics and Advertising Sales data and research stacks which included, among others, Google Analytics, Parse.ly, Krux DMP, Optimizely, comScore, Kantar, Samba, Newswhip, Crowd Tangle, Buzzsumo, and CrazyEgg.
Prior to The Daily Beast, Chris spent 5 years as Associate and Acting Director at Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia where he directed the correspondence and development of all research-based strategies supporting the Advertising Sales and Marketing staffs of each of the MSLO media brands and platforms across digital, mobile/tablet, TV, print and radio.
Chris started his career at BBDO as an Assistant Media Planner where he most notably completed the “Media Training Program”.
Chris earned a Bachelor’s of Arts in English and Communications from Fairfield University in Fairfield, Connecticut.
Alex ConeAlex joined Tech Lab in early 2020 after 7 years at Xandr (formerly AppNexus) where he lead multiple product and engineering groups to deliver a broad range of successful ad tech products. Alex stood up Xandr’s Privacy product and engineering capability in 2018 and since realized digital privacy is the area of advertising where he can make the most impact to the industry and consumers. Alex believes Tech Lab–with its global reach, technology focus, diverse membership and trade group relationships–is uniquely positioned as a place where he can leave a positive lasting mark on privacy.
Conor HealyJessalin LamJessalin Lam is a learning and development leader, DEI champion, and mentor with over 10 years of combined experience across L&D, DEI, marketing, partnerships, business development, and consulting. Jessalin is a lifelong learner and connector who loves to cultivate learning cultures and empower people to thrive and seize their potential with a growth mindset.
Jessalin joined IAB from TBWA\Worldwide, where she was the Precision Marketing Academy Director for the Nissan account leading a global employee training program across the agency and client. Prior to that, she worked at the American Association of Advertising Agencies (4A’s), where she consulted with agency HR partners and leaders to help them develop their talent from entry-level to executive level across various trainings.
In 2021, Jessalin was elected to the Association for Talent Development NYC Board of Directors. She is also the Co-Founder of Asians in Advertising, a community focused on creating opportunities for Asians and elevating them to higher leadership positions.
Rachel McEnerneyOver the course of her 15 year career, Rachel has had the honor of working at some of the most respected companies in the industry. Getting her start at Edelman PR, she focused primarily on forging and executing media and content partnerships with broadcast and digital properties on behalf of clients. Her subsequent roles supporting cable ad sales at NBCUniversal and the CNÉ sales team at Condé Nast fully immersed her in the world of digital media and sales marketing and set her up for success when she joined Vevo to lead their Ad Sales Marketing team. During her five years with the music video platform, Rachel was a respected leader within the sales organization and focused her efforts on innovating strategic solutions for client partners and crafting complex go-to-market products and narratives in support of Vevo’s global salesforce.
Michael TexidorBrendan ThomasBrendan is IAB’s Vice President of Policy Communications, helping to create greater awareness among policy makers and the press of digital advertising’s importance to technological and economic progress, creativity, and the ad-supported internet.
He works closely with IAB’s legal and public policy experts, as well as more than 700 IAB members, to enhance public understanding of digital marketing and advertising’s value to small businesses and their customers, and the industry’s innovations to online commerce, personal data protection and privacy, and more.
Prior to joining IAB, Brendan directed policy communications for members of Congress and for a major trade association. A graduate of Northwestern University, he received his Master’s Degree from University of Southern California and worked as a reporter and producer in the news and entertainment industries in New York and Los Angeles.
Benjamin DickBen is Director, Data & Ad Effectiveness within IAB’s Data Center of Excellence. He leads IAB projects within its automation, identity, measurement/attribution groups, and works with leading ad technologists, agencies and publishers to identify and navigate some of the most pressing opportunities and challenges within these verticals. By developing best practices, research, white papers, and thought leadership in collaboration with IAB members, Ben helps improve and facilitate digital media buying and selling via automated tools, software and data.
Prior to joining the IAB, Ben was Associate Director, Digital Trading at GroupM where he oversaw programmatic strategy, measurement / optimization, ad operations, and private marketplace relationships across Nestlé 85 brand US portfolio. In this capacity he was responsible for building and “productizing” the Nestlé Trade Desk (NTD), an independent programmatic buying unit developed specifically to service Nestle brands. Prior to his work on Nestlé, Ben held positions at both Maxus Global and Universal McCann where he helped lead the development of programmatic and measurement/attribution strategies for large global brands including MasterCard, Barclays, Harvard Business School, and Welch’s.
Ben received a B.S. in Communications and Entrepreneurship from the S.I. Newhouse School of Public Communications at Syracuse University and resides in Brooklyn, NY.
John GriffertyErick HarrisErick currently serves as Legislative Director and Senior Counsel to Congressman Steve Chabot (OH). In addition to handling the judiciary portfolio, Erick focuses on financial services, tax, labor, and technology issues. Erick formerly served as Legislative Counsel to Congresswoman Emerson (MO) and as an aide to Senator Jim Talent (MO) and at the U.S. Department of Justice in the Office of the Solicitor General.
While completing his law degree, Erick served on the Wiley Rutledge Moot Court Board and as Senior Editor of the Washington University Jurisprudence Review. He appeared on various media outlets to discuss the 2008 Presidential election.
Erick received his Juris Doctor from Washington University in St. Louis, School of Law and his Bachelor of Science Degree from Vanderbilt University in Political Science and Human and Organizational Development with a concentration on Public Policy. While studying at Vanderbilt, Erick served on the Honor Council and completed internships with the U.S. House of Representatives, the U.S. Senate, the British House of Commons, and at the White House.
Erick is originally from Cape Girardeau, Missouri and he and his wife, Bridgette currently reside in Washington D.C with their miniature goldendoodle, Vandy.
Nicole HorsfordNicole joins the IAB as Senior Manager in the Member Services department. In this role she strategically engages and recruits IAB membership through the creation of our many offerings and events. Nicole draws from her wealth of industry experience both on the buy side, having worked for Saatchi and Saatchi, and on the sell side at Oddcast and Westwood One. Her natural curiosity and desire to learn the industry also landed her experience client side, working as a Marketing Manager for Emblem Health. Nicole graduated from Fordham University with a BA in Communications & Media Studies, as well as a business degree. Her latest curiosity is travel, and when not working she tries to discover as many new places as possible.
Deleela JonesDeleela Jones was most recently head of B2B marketing at Live Nation Entertainment where she was responsible for building Live Nation’s value proposition to advertisers and promoting the brand’s thought-leadership.
Prior to joining Live Nation, Deleela was Senior Director of Industry & Agency Marketing at Pandora Media where she led strategy, planning and execution of Pandora’s high impact industry events and agency programs.
Throughout her professional career, Deleela has held marketing leadership positions at some of the biggest media brands in the world, including USA TODAY/Gannett, Yahoo! and Univision Communications. She is known for helping to drive revenue for high-performing sales organizations and the ability to forge strategic partnerships.
Deleela earned an M.B.A. in marketing from Baruch College in NYC and a Bachelor of Arts with Distinction in telecommunications from Penn State University.
Kathleen McKayKathleen has been the Event Director at IAB since 2018. In this role, she and the events team are responsible for all the behind-the-scenes magic that bring an event to life. Prior to joining IAB, Kathleen worked for over 10 years in the meeting and events industry. Most recently as the Senior Manager, Special Event for the David Lynch Foundation and the Event Director at IQPC, a leading conference company.
In her spare time, she loves to travel, explore the NYC/Hoboken restaurant scene, go on brewery tours, binge watch Law & Order, and spend time with her boyfriend and nieces.
Kathleen received her Bachelors of Science from James Madison University and currently resides in Hoboken, NJ.
Mayank MishraMayank is a visionary technologist, bringing several years of thoughtful leadership in all stages of technology design, development, execution in support of a product vision and road-map with experience from large corporations to early startups adept in conceiving, defining, developing, & launching Web & mobile applications.
He has designed system software, Middleware, eCommerce and Mobile platform/apps for Fortune 50 corporations to startups for companies like IBM, Appssavvy,Kickapps and Flurry.
With certifications like PMI, Java/J2EE, Business Rules and also being speaker at developer conferences, he loves learning new technology and designing platforms.
With several mobile apps in app store and SDK’s running on thousand of devices, he loves to spend time in building mobile and wearable apps or playing guitar.
Nicole PellegrinoNicole Pellegrino joins the IAB most recently from Outbrain where she worked with leading publishers to monetize and diversify revenue streams. Prior to Outbrain, Nicole held various roles at InStyle, Conde Nast, VEVO and Specific Media/VIANT where she focused her time collaborating with brands to create multi-platform solutions and branded content programs. With a foundation in strategic planning/buying, Nicole is passionate about media and the world of interactive marketing.
Outside of the office you can find Nicole spending time with her husband and beautiful daughter, cooking a delicious Italian meal or enjoying an 80s Peloton ride.
Joe PillaJoe Pilla joined IAB in Summer of 2018 as Director, Data & Automation within the IAB Programmatic+Data Center. In his role, Joe works closely with Orchid Richardson, VP, Managing Director on a variety of projects related to data transparency, attribution modeling and the changing consumer experience.
Joe brings a wealth of diverse media experience to IAB from his accomplished career in advertising research and consumer insights. Previously, Joe was Vice President, Social Insights at Zenith Media where he led the Social Intelligence practice providing clients with data analysis related to their brand environment, online conversation and campaign performance. Joe spearheaded several agency thought leadership initiatives covering a wide spectrum of topics including brand integrations, the rise of Influencer Marketing, shifts in consumer behavior, and the relationship between televised tent pole events and Social Media channels.
Prior to Zenith, Joe was the Associate Director of Media & Consumer Insights at Mindshare where he led the adoption of The Loop, the agency’s global operating system linking real-time multimedia insights to real-time actions. Naturally curious, Joe excelled at developing the annual US Consumer Trends presenting the agency perspective to clients nationwide. Before making a move to the agency world, Joe honed his storytelling expertise at Condè Nast, Meredith Corporation and Reader’s Digest where he mastered syndicated research bringing the magazine consumer to life.
Joe earned a Bachelor’s of Science in Marketing from Rutgers University. He lives in Long Island City with his husband Kevin Davis, AIA. Joe sits on the board of SuperCommunityLIC, a local organization celebrating the local community while finding ways to give back. In his spare time, Joe produces his YouTube Channel “Pop Culture Monger” dedicated to the latest entertainment news with the tagline nonsense to follow.
Soizic SacrezJill WittkoppJill Wittkopp is Senior Director of Management at the IAB Tech Lab, a global consortium for technical standards in the digital advertising industry. Prior to joining the IAB Tech Lab, Jill worked on the buy side of programmatic advertising with companies like MyBuys, Magnetic and Rakuten. She has a B.A. in English from the University of Michigan, Dearborn and lives in San Francisco, California.
Jarrett WoldJarrett Wold comes to the IAB Tech Lab with a diverse background in technology leading teams focused on digital applications. His most recent role was Director of Technology and Platforms at Ad-ID, where he was overseeing Ad-ID’s technology endeavors and focusing on industry standards for the advertising ecosystem. His former role as Director of Technology includes Ad-ID, Rodale, Inc. and HealthiNation. He also worked at AOL on AOL Video, AOL Search, and Moviefone. He graduated from Syracuse University and is a huge Orange fan!Luz BritoCameron BurnhamCameron is a pioneer of the digital media industry having worked at iconic industry brands like Yahoo!, News Corp, and Twitter.
For the last 20 years, his career has spanned across sales, strategic partnerships, business development, and sales management roles with a consultative approach that’s delivered trusted and value-driven partnerships.
His industry experience runs across Digital Display, Video/OTT, Social, DOOH, Programmatic, and SaaS. Most recently, Cameron has focused his work around deterministic, people-based, activation’s and omni-channel attribution initiatives with the purpose of providing incremental revenue and scaling wanted business impact.
A passionate industry professional and relationship builder who is committed to exceeding goals and expectations for partners, his team and company.
Rowena LamRowena brings years of experience in product development of ad-supported casual games on mobile and web. Most recently, she led product at Jump Ramp Games where she was responsible for the strategic direction and vision of the consumer-facing mobile apps. This included the development and launch of several games, supporting internal tools, and ad monetization services. In addition to product leadership, Rowena also has a background in digital marketing. In her spare time, Rowena enjoys trying out new recipes and traveling.
Mina PajevicMatt ShapoMatt Shapo is a product development and digital strategy leader who brings more than 20 years of experience overseeing the creation and multi-platform delivery of online content and internet advertising to his role as the Director of Digital Audio and Video at the IAB.
Before IAB, Matt served as VP of Digital Content for the All Access Music Group, a music marketing company and audio industry news publisher where he planned and led advertising, editorial, and other growth initiatives for AllAccess.com, a B2B website that delivers breaking news, data, and commentary to an audience of professional audio content creators, salespeople, and decisionmakers.
Over the course of his career, Matt has directed and measured the effectiveness of integrated advertising and email marketing campaigns for multiple leading record labels and radio companies. He has also led the ideation, development, launch, and continuous iteration of profitable digital media products, including an industry leading digital audio distribution platform that delivers new music and related content to a nationwide user base of radio stations, streaming services, tv networks, podcasters, and others.
Matt holds a B.A. in Political Science and International Relations from Tufts University and an M.F.A. in Radio, TV, and Film Production from Florida State University, and he is a devoted fan of his hometown Miami Dolphins. He lives with his wife, Jennifer, and their wonderful son Evan, in Randolph, NJ where he is an enthusiastic hiker and a proud member of the Randolph High School Marching Rams parents’ road crew.
Colleen ShieldsColleen Shields joined the IAB in 2012, and supports the IAB Tech Lab in advancing the team’s work of producing protocols and tools that help companies implement global industry technical standards. Colleen is a native Wisconsinite, though she has lived in London and Sydney previously. In her spare time she enjoys attending storytelling and comedy events around New York, pointing out that all things great in the world stem from Wisconsin, hiding her North-woods accent, and working on silversmithing in her basement.
Brooke StevensElizabeth AcayanAs a CMS (content management system) admin and project coordinator, Elizabeth is involved with content, page creation, and maintenance of the website. She plans, customizes and integrates third party softwares and applications with the website for the best possible user experience.
LaToya AndersonI have 20 years experience in accounting and administration. Before joining IAB, I started my career as a Client Associate at Chase Manhattan Bank in Global Trading. I then moved on from Chase and started working at Bank of New York as a Financial Analyst in Investment Management. I decided I wanted to try a little something different and started working at Long Island University as a Executive Assistant. I enjoyed it and it definitely was too easy so I went back to accounting. I started working at Major Food Group (Carbone, Sadelles, The Grill, and Lobster Club to name a few) a very well known Hospitality Group as a Staff Accountant.
I love traveling with my two amazing daughters Tatiana and Tiana along with my significant other. I enjoy watching Football and I am a huge fan of the Philadelphia Eagles. When I visit my country Belize I volunteer at the Orphanage Child Care Program.
I am a alumni of Berkeley College where I received my degree in Accounting. I am a member of the National Black Accountants Association.
Matthew AzarkMatt has worked in digital media for over 12 years with stops at companies like[email protected], CBS Interactive, and Undertone. He currently lives in Park Slope, Brooklyn with his wife (who is also in the industry) and 4-year-old son.
Rafeh BaigLea BarthelemyLea brings diverse experiences ranging from B2B and B2C marketing, amongst other various industries. She is beyond excited to be joining the IAB marketing team!Sahiba BhatnagarSahiba Bhatnagar has a background in the nonprofit world, with experience at the David Lynch Foundation and UNICEF. While working for these companies, she gathered experience in administration, development, and events. Working galas and fundraisers for both these companies made her fall in love with putting together events.
Marcela BonancioMarcela is an Executive Assistant that has been working with C- level in the marketing/ media/ advertising industry for over 10 years.
Renee BourneRenee Bourne is a dynamic and resourceful professional, with an exceptional background working in the ever changing, fast-paced events industry. Prior to joining IAB, Renee has worked at Dow Jones and Black Enterprise as their Sponsorship Manager. She comes with a plethora of experience handling best in class brand management for assigned accounts that brings cross platform media campaigns & national event partnerships to life.
In her spare time Renee likes to travel with her two daughters and manage her online children’s boutique.
Renee received her Associates Degree from Long Island University C.W. Post and a Bachelor of Science from SUNY Empire College.
Halle ClemensPrior to joining Tech Lab, Halle worked as a production assistant on commercials for companies such Apple, Nike, Tostitos. During the pandemic, she was a volunteer teacher’s assistant at a refugee center, working with refugees from North Africa, the Middle East, and Central Asia.
Anne EspinalAnne Espinal joins IAB as an Account Manager for the Member Engagement and Development team focusing on post-sale management. Previously, Anne was with Nielsen on the Client Solutions Team working directly with clients to inform and support Nielsen products for both traditional TV and digital offerings. Prior to that, Anne worked on the Audio team at Univision, managing sold audio sponsorships from inception to execution as well as planning and strategizing media plans. Anne brings her experience in client relationship and project management to execute seamless sponsorships and campaigns for IAB and its members.
Tony FicarrottaTony is an experienced lawyer specializing in issues affecting digital advertising and media. Most recently, Tony was attorney at ZwillGen, where his practice focused on advising ad-tech platforms, social media companies, and digital publishers on strategy and compliance in connection with privacy requirements. Tony previously served as counsel for the Network Advertising Initiative and worked at an international law firm. Tony holds a J.D. from the Duke University School of Law, and an M.A. in philosophy from Georgetown University.
Jackie GarciaJackie has extensive accounting experience in the non-profit sector working alongside the Archdiocese of NY working in customer support, accounts receivable, cash receipts, and treasury functions. Jackie is thrilled about starting her new role at IAB.
Isabelle Garrick-OkoliIsabelle joins IAB as a Salesforce Coordinator. Prior to coming to IAB, Isabelle worked as an engagement manager at a DC consulting firm where she also administered their Salesforce instance. That nurtured an interest in pursuing Salesforce more deliberately as a career path and led her here. In her free time, she likes to make candles, do crosswords and explore new cities. Isabelle looks forward to learning from and working with the team at IAB.
Meredith GuinessMeredith Green is an experienced analytics professional who loves data-driven storytelling, bringing to life the meaning (the “why”) behind consumer behavior. She has spent the majority of her career agency-side, holding positions across digital planning and analytics and has a strong passion for cross-functional learning. Meredith holds bachelor’s degrees in Psychology and Italian Studies from Emory University and loves to travel, eat (is a big foodie!), and spend time with family and friends.
Todd HenryTodd Henry is a Senior Product Manager with the IAB Tech Lab. He has 15 years of experience in the digital publishing industry working for Weather Underground, The Weather Company, and IBM. With a background in engineering and product management, Todd’s previous companies include Intuit, Brøderbund Software, and Mattel.
Michelle HeviaMax KaplanSocial media guy with a craving for the next big thing. When I’m not feverishly scrolling through Twitter, I can be found at the park with my dog, in the cheapest seat at the Knicks game, or burning up at the beach!Alexandra LamAlexandra Lam has over ten years of experience in a variety of roles within the digital media landscape. She has provided guidance and support to industries ranging from media production to hospitality.
Tyler LettichTyler joins IAB from Adweek where he served as Director, Programming and Events where he led the event and programming team strategy, including oversight of topic ideation, speaker recruitment, moderator preparation for more than 40+ events. Tyler started his career at Argyle producing 1-day CMO Forums and later moved to the Innovative Enterprise business when the company tripled its size through acquisitions. At Innovation Enterprise, he developed large scale 2-day multi-themed programs for marketing, advertising, and media executives. Tyler has a passion for marketing, advertising, and media. For Tyler, there’s nothing more exciting than pitching a potential speaker and getting the win! He has a passion for creating programs and delivering enticing and relevant content for audiences. Tyler earned his B.A. in Communications and Public Relations from William Paterson University.
Hannah NardoneHannah joined the IAB in November of 2018. She serves as a Member Services Manager with a focus in post-sales. Hannah is an alumna of Villanova University and holds a Bachelor’s degree in Economics and Classical Studies.
Diana NegronDaniel PhelanMatthew Renne’Matthew Renne joins the Learning & Development team as an Account Director. Prior to joining the IAB, Matthew was with TBWA Worldwide where he led global partner relationships & regional precision marketing growth for Nissan. Matthew brings an energetic and detailed process driven approach to his work, which he looks forward to bringing to the L&D team. Outside the office, Matthew spends his time playing volleyball, baking, and biking.
Melissa RocaStudied Public Relations and Advertising at City College and bring several years of experience working in administrative roles.
Lena SafronLena Safron is an experienced graphic designer who has created for an eclectic collection of individuals, companies, and organizations. She has designed marketing materials for women’s fashion brands Vince Camuto and Jones New York while at Authentic Brands Group. Other work experience includes designing for entertainment marketing company Passion Point Collective and event planning company Drury Design Dynamics. She has also worked on the accounts of select entertainment and pharma clients. Lena received her BFA in Communications Design at Pratt Institute and her senior thesis work was featured at the Pratt Show for industry professionals. Offline, Lena enjoys going to concerts and Broadway shows, and in the past year has developed a love for hiking and the great outdoors. She stays on-trend creatively by following other artists on social media and visiting galleries and museums whenever possible. Lena is very excited to join IAB as the first in-house graphic designer!Katie ShellKatie joined IAB Tech Lab in May 2021. She works as a Data Coordinator. Katie is an alumna of Bucknell University in the Freeman College of Management where she earned a Bachelor’s degree in Markets, Innovation, and Design in 2020.
Alexus SmithKelsey SorensonDonia VanceDonia Vance, joins the IAB as Senior Content Director. She brings a wide breadth of experience to her role including go-to-market strategy, content development, experiential programming and brand marketing. Donia was previously the Senior Partnerships Director at Unger Media’s Greenwich Wine + Food Festival where she managed and oversaw national accounts including PepsiCo, Jeep and Anheuser-Busch. Prior to that, she was the Executive Director Customer Engagement and Events at WebMD where she created strategy for marketing and thought leadership activations that drove brand awareness and revenue for both the Pharma and CPG sides of the business. She has also worked at Hearst, Conde Nast, Martha Stewart and Rolling Stone, where she first developed her passion for media and experiential marketing.
Megan VasilesMegan Vasiles is a digital marketing strategist with over a decade of experience helping global organizations optimize marketing plans and build long-term strategies for success.
She lives in Manhattan and hopes to adopt a cat soon! In her downtime you can find her writing science fiction, baking tasty vegan treats, or wandering the aisles of the nearest bookstore.
Jianna CaronanJianna is a digital native – creating graphics, editing videos, and growing social media pages since 2010. Formerly an engineering student, she has had the pleasure of supporting brands and organizations on campus, through internships, and in a freelance capacity. Jianna received her Associates from the County College of Morris and is a proud alumna of Rutgers Business School where she received a Bachelor of Science in Marketing in 2021.
Barbara KrzanickaBarbara has been an Executive Assistant for 20 years, 4 years have been spent in the not-for-profit world.
She has a varied background in complex calendar management, project management, and events coordination.
Barbara holds a B.A. in Criminal Justice from John Jay College of Criminal Justice.
Jonathan MoralesJonathan Morales has a decade of experience helping nonprofits derive value from their data. In his most recent role at NPR, Jonathan led the fundraising and finance teams’ inhouse migration to Salesforce, leveraging the platform’s flexibility to support network fundraising, optimize complex business processes, and surface relevant information. Jonathan previously held database management roles at the USO and the National Trust for Historic Preservation, and consulted for other nonprofits. Jonathan holds degrees in history and music from Georgetown University and Oberlin College and Conservatory.
Dwenne SaindoryDwenne is a graduate of Murray Koppelman School of Business. She earned her M.S focusing on Global Business and received her undergraduate degree in Marketing from York College. She is a fashion content creator, educator, and philanthropist.
Katie StroudKatie Stroud is Senior Product Manager with IAB Tech Lab, currently managing products for improving ad experiences in ad tech. Katie has been working with IAB since 2011 on products for video, creative formatting, ad delivery, and rich media interactions in video and display. Nearly native to the Pacific Northwest, Katie enjoys the rain, long bike rides (sometimes at the same time), and finding ways to improve ad experiences for brands, publishers, and consumers.
David CohenDavid Cohen joined IAB in April 2020 as President and was named Chief Executive Officer in September 2020. Cohen is a widely respected advertising agency leader who, prior to IAB, served as President, North America for MAGNA, Interpublic Group’s (IPG) centralized media intelligence, investment, and innovation arm. In this role, Cohen was responsible for more than $20 billion in media spend. During his tenure, Cohen structured and executed large global transactions on behalf of IPG and its clients, with such major IAB member companies as Facebook, Google, Microsoft, Spotify, Twitter, and Verizon Media.
Prior to MAGNA, Cohen served as Chief Investment Officer of UM, ensuring that digital innovation, data, and technology acumen flowed throughout the agency to drive performance. From 2001 to 2011, Cohen served in critical, transformational roles at UM during the explosive growth of digital advertising, including Chief Media Officer, Chief Digital Officer, and Executive Vice President, U.S. Director of Digital Communications. In the late 1990’s, Cohen was responsible for launching and building IPG’s digital practice.
Cohen has a long history of working with trade organizations including IAB and 4As, where he served as chairman of the Interactive Marketing Committee from 2009-2013. He has also been instrumental in initiating several vital industry-wide programs, including the Future of Television, facilitated by EY. Cohen is a Queens native, with a bachelor’s degree in communications from Adelphi University. He was recognized by Adweek as a “Media All Star” and was part of the “Adweek 50” in 2012.
In 2016, David was elected to the Board of Directors of Partnership with Children a non-profit whose mission is to strengthen the emotional, social, and cognitive skills of vulnerable children in New York City to help them succeed in school, society, and life.
David enjoys spending time with his wife and two teenage daughters. A self-described gadget-geek and sometimes fitness fanatic – he ran the NYC Marathon in 2014 and 2019 and Boston Marathon in 2016.
David CohenDavid Cohen joined IAB in April 2020 as President and was named Chief Executive Officer in September 2020. Cohen is a widely respected advertising agency leader who, prior to IAB, served as President, North America for MAGNA, Interpublic Group’s (IPG) centralized media intelligence, investment, and innovation arm. In this role, Cohen was responsible for more than $20 billion in media spend. During his tenure, Cohen structured and executed large global transactions on behalf of IPG and its clients, with such major IAB member companies as Facebook, Google, Microsoft, Spotify, Twitter, and Verizon Media.
Prior to MAGNA, Cohen served as Chief Investment Officer of UM, ensuring that digital innovation, data, and technology acumen flowed throughout the agency to drive performance. From 2001 to 2011, Cohen served in critical, transformational roles at UM during the explosive growth of digital advertising, including Chief Media Officer, Chief Digital Officer, and Executive Vice President, U.S. Director of Digital Communications. In the late 1990’s, Cohen was responsible for launching and building IPG’s digital practice.
Cohen has a long history of working with trade organizations including IAB and 4As, where he served as chairman of the Interactive Marketing Committee from 2009-2013. He has also been instrumental in initiating several vital industry-wide programs, including the Future of Television, facilitated by EY. Cohen is a Queens native, with a bachelor’s degree in communications from Adelphi University. He was recognized by Adweek as a “Media All Star” and was part of the “Adweek 50” in 2012.
In 2016, David was elected to the Board of Directors of Partnership with Children a non-profit whose mission is to strengthen the emotional, social, and cognitive skills of vulnerable children in New York City to help them succeed in school, society, and life.
David enjoys spending time with his wife and two teenage daughters. A self-described gadget-geek and sometimes fitness fanatic – he ran the NYC Marathon in 2014 and 2019 and Boston Marathon in 2016.
Anthony KatsurAnthony Katsur is a media technology veteran with more than twenty-five years of executive leadership and technical experience at innovative technology companies in the digital media industry.
Most recently, Anthony was SVP, Strategy, Operations and Corporate Development at Nexstar Media Group, Inc., the largest local broadcaster in the United States. Anthony was responsible for overseeing strategy, technology platforms and corporate development across Nexstar’s portfolio of digital assets.
Prior to Nexstar, Anthony served as President of Sonobi, where he implemented their product and go to market strategy around people-based marketing. Anthony recruited, and led highly effective teams while driving strategic partnerships with leading media companies, agencies and brands.
Prior to Sonobi, Anthony held global leadership roles at Rubicon Project as EVP of Business Operations and General Manager of Buyer Cloud. He also held global executive roles at MediaMath and Maxifier, where he served as CEO. Earlier in his career, he joined DoubleClick via the acquisition of NetGravity where he lead multiple engineering divisions and also fulfilled several product leadership and general management roles.
Anthony is an active participant at industry conferences, speaking about the latest ends in advertising at the National Association of Broadcasters, AdAge’s Brand Summit, Advertising Week, Broadcasting & Cable, AdMonsters and GABBCON. He has been quoted on industry trends and provided thought leadership in The Wall Street Journal, AdAge, Adweek, AdExchanger, MediaPost, Econsultancy and Digiday, among others.
Michael LebowitzMichael Lebowitz is Founder and CEO of Big Spaceship, a globally-recognized marketing agency that creates connected experiences, products and services. Since launching the agency in 2000, he has defined the strategy and vision for Big Spaceship, while working closely with the agency’s clients, including BMW, Capital One, Google Play, Google Maps, Ken Burns, Nestle-Purina, Organic Valley, Samsung, West Elm, and YouTube.
At Big Spaceship Michael has assembled “a crack team of digital inventors,” according to Fast Company’s “Most Innovative Companies” list, and has led the company to be named one of Advertising Age and Crain’s New York Business Best Places to Work for multiple years in a row. Big Spaceship’s multidisciplinary team structure and progressive culture have been profiled by Harvard Business School, with the case study now taught at business schools in 40 countries.
Speaking on creativity, innovation and the evolution of business, Michael speaks across the globe and has engaged audiences at top industry events including Cannes Festival of Creativity, SXSW, Click:NY, Forge Conference, Advertising Week, Click:London and ad:tech, as well as at business schools including NYU Stern, Long Island University and SLU’s Institute for Private Business.
He frequently chairs and sits on juries for creative awards and influential industry organizations including the IAB Agency Advisory Board and annual MIXX Awards, The One Club, Society of Digital Agencies and The International Academy of Digital Arts & Sciences, among others. And has led the agency to win countless awards of its own including an Emmy Award nomination for the agency’s work with HBO Voyeur, Cannes Lions, Clios, Webbys, Andys, and One Show Interactive Pencils, as well as numerous IAB MIXX, Webby, Shorty, FWA, Communication Arts, W3 and Pixel Awards, among others. Michael was also named among the 2010 Creativity 50 and the 2008 OMMA Online All-Stars.
Orchid RichardsonOrchid Richardson serves as the newly appointed Vice President and Managing Director, IAB Programmatic+Data Center. She is charged with driving the Center’s mission to define boundaries, reduce friction, and increase value along the data supply chain, for consumers, marketers, and the ecosystem that supports them.
Before joining the IAB Data Center, Orchid was General Manager of Publisher & Media Solutions for 33Across, Inc. where she was responsible for leading the global business strategy & development for both the company’s growth and the growth of their publisher partners. Her successes include leading the development and integration of the 33Across Real Platform with over 250 demand partner, developing a product suite that was the catalyst for the company’s pivot into programmatic and launching the Real Platform in 12 countries located in EMEA, LATAM and North America.
Orchid also served as Head of Digital Operations for Hearst Magazines Digital Media. There, she was responsible for architecting the Hearst Audience Exchange that represented the consolidation of Hearst’s audience data for multiple Hearst corporate units including Magazines, Newspaper, Entertainment, and Broadcast on to one platform for strategic company-wide initiatives.
Before Hearst, Orchid was Senior Director of Advertising Operations & Strategy for BET Networks within the Digital Group. Orchid has also served in management roles at other leading digital companies including Everyday Health, Singer Direct (an Omnicom Media Group Company) and Multimedia Solutions.
Orchid is actively involved in the advertising community, having held leadership roles in key industry trade organizations. Additionally, she is an active member of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc., the Metro-Manhattan (NY) Chapter of the Links, Incorporated and the Westchester Chapter of Jack & Jill of America. Orchid also serves as a board member and fundraising chair of the Ujamaa Community Development Corporation which has built over $100 million in affordable housing in Westchester County, New York.
She is an alumna of Spelman College and New York University’s Stern School of Business where she holds a degree in Business Administration & International Business.
A citizen of the world having visited over 30 countries, Orchid is based in New York where she lives with her husband, Eugene Uzamere, Esq. and their children, Owen, Addison, Ivie, Eki, and Nosa.
Zoe SoonZoe Soon has 10+ years of experience building products in technology-driven businesses with a heavy focus on mobile. Six years ago Zoe flew 21 hours from Sydney to NYC for a 30min coffee meeting which led to her first job in NYC. Since then she’s worked with three major New York based media companies, The New York Times, Condé Nast and Business Insider on projects ranging from location-based apps to paywalls. Zoe began her career as a user researcher and UX design consultant working with three of the top five banks in Australia. She was then hired to establish a user insights practice at Fairfax Media, a leading Australian news and media conglomerate. Here she led the user research for the flagship news apps which won Best Mobile News Product at the 2012 Australian Mobile Awards and went on to become product lead for the news sites. In this role she launched a content paywall and a unified user data system to diversify revenue and enable more targeted marketing.
Prior to joining the IAB Zoe was General Manager of apps and email at Business Insider where she was charged with defining the go-to market strategy for these platforms. In this role Zoe launched Insider Inc’s first OTT apps across Apple, Amazon Fire and Roku offering advertisers cross-platform video digital distribution and access to an audience that generates over 2 billion views each month.
Zoe has a Masters in Organizational Psychology and lives in New York. She enjoys burning pancakes, Cuban salsa dancing and talking to strangers in line.
Krishan BhatiaKrishan Bhatia serves as President & Chief Business Officer for NBCUniversal’s Advertising Sales division, reporting to Linda Yaccarino, Chairman, Global Advertising & Partnerships. Bhatia, with the help of his 500-person team, oversees Digital & Advanced Advertising Sales as well as the division’s One Platform Strategy, Partnerships, Product, Technology, Measurement and Operations functions — spanning a portfolio of TV, streaming and digital assets that reaches 230 Million viewers every month, including the company’s ad-supported streaming platform Peacock.
In 2021, Bhatia launched the company’s Enterprise Data unit to develop NBCUnified, the first-party data platform that serves NBCUniversal’s entire portfolio – including all TV & streaming properties, the NBC News Group, Universal Filmed Entertainment and Universal Parks & Resorts.
Bhatia also manages the corporate partnerships with Comcast Advertising, Freewheel and Sky Media, as well NBCU’s advertising partnerships with Amazon, Apple, Google/YouTube, Roku, Snap, The Trade Desk, TikTok, Twitter and others.
Bhatia took on his role at NBCUniversal after Comcast acquired the company in 2011 and led the integration of the two companies’ advertising businesses. He joined Comcast in 2005 as a founding executive team member of Comcast Interactive Media, where he played an instrumental role in creating and growing the digital media business for Comcast through acquisitions and partnerships.
Prior to Comcast, Bhatia was a Principal with Booz Allen Hamilton’s Global Media & Entertainment Practice in New York, advising many of the world’s leading media and technology companies.
Bhatia serves as chairman of the IAB and a board member of OpenAP.
Pooja MidhaPooja Midha is President of true[X], the most effective engagement advertising platform for on-demand, interactive media, leading the company’s daily operations and long-term strategy. As President, her mission is to grow true[X]’s roster of advertiser and premium publisher partnerships; expand its industry-leading ad products to create value for consumers, advertisers, and media companies; and further true[X]’s active role as an advocate for high-quality, measurable advertising across platforms.
Pooja most recently spent more than five years as senior vice president of digital ad sales and operations for the ABC Television Network, where she oversaw sales, strategy, and revenue operations for all of ABC’s digital properties — the ABC app, abc.com, abcnews.com, GMA on Yahoo, ABC on Hulu, Oscars digital, all ABC dynamically ad-served set top box video on demand, and all social and new media platforms. Pooja previously had worked for ten years at Viacom Media Networks, including serving as senior vice president of digital ad sales for the Music and Entertainment Group.
Pooja currently serves as vice chair of the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB) Video Board, co-chair of the IAB Long Form Video Committee, and is a member of the IAB CRO Council. Pooja also serves as a member of the Upstream Seller Forum Advisory Board. She holds a B.A. from Lehigh University and an MBA from Columbia Business School. She has also completed the National Association of Multi-Ethnicity in Communications (NAMIC) Executive Leadership Development Program from UCLA’s Anderson School of Management.
Pooja currently resides in New York City with her husband, Allan Beaufour.
Randall RothenbergRandall Rothenberg is the Executive Chair of the Interactive Advertising Bureau, the trade association for digital media and marketing in the United States. Among the IAB’s 750 member companies are such major platforms as Google, Facebook, Microsoft, and Snap; the nation’s most important ad-supported media companies, including The New York Times, Walt Disney Co., NBC Universal, ViacomCBS, Hearst Magazines, Spotify, Verizon Media, Hulu, Warner Media, LinkedIn, and Meredith; incumbent and disruptor brands, including Coca-Cola, Walmart, Procter & Gamble, Hubble Contacts, ThirdLove, General Motors, Johnson & Johnson, and Citigroup; and scores of technology and data companies, among them Mediamath, LiveRamp, Quantcast, and Pubmatic.
With these members and its 47 affiliate associations on every inhabited continent, the IAB and its sister technology-standards group, the IAB Tech Lab, serve as the digital marketing industry’s public policy and lobbying organization, market and consumer research center, training and development base, and hub for the development of standards and best practices.
Mr. Rothenberg joined the IAB in January 2007 as President and Chief Executive Officer, and led the organization until becoming Executive Chair in September 2020. During his tenure, the organization became one of the largest and most influential media and marketing trade bodies in the world, helping to develop technical standards, self-regulation, government regulation, market and consumer research, and professional development programs to protect consumer privacy, foster brand and media revenue growth, improve data security, and reduce supply chain friction in the digital marketing industry.
Prior to his IAB role, Mr. Rothenberg was the Chief Marketing Officer and Senior Director of Intellectual Capital at Booz Allen Hamilton, the international strategy and technology consulting firm, where he oversaw business development, knowledge management, and thought leadership activities, and directed the award-winning quarterly business magazine strategy+business, Strategy+Business Books, www.strategy-business.com, and other electronic and print publications for senior business executives.
Earlier in his career, Mr. Rothenberg spent six years at The New York Times, where he was the technology editor and politics editor of the Sunday magazine, the daily advertising columnist, and a media and marketing reporter. For 10 years, he was a marketing and media columnist for Advertising Age. Mr. Rothenberg has written for a score of major national magazines, among them Esquire, GQ, The Nation, The New York Times Magazine, and New York Magazine. He is the author of four books, including Where the Suckers Moon: An Advertising Story (Alfred A. Knopf, 1994), a critically-acclaimed chronicle of the birth, evolution, and death of a single advertising campaign.
Mr. Rothenberg, an avid nature, urban, and portrait photographer, serves on the Board of Directors of the International Center of Photography and the Board of Overseers of the Columbia Journalism Review. He received an undergraduate degree in Classics from Princeton and lives in New York City.
Alysia BorsaAlysia Borsa is President of Meredith Digital of Meredith Corporation’s National Media Group, the leading multi-platform media company focused on women – reaching 95% of all U.S. women and more than 190 million unduplicated American consumers every month. Borsa oversees all digital strategy, content, products, technology, sales, marketing, e-commerce and operations for the company’s 40+ iconic brands, including PEOPLE, Better Homes & Gardens, Allrecipes, Southern Living and REAL SIMPLE.
Since joining Meredith a decade ago, Borsa has served in several executive roles, including EVP/Chief Data Officer, Chief Business Officer and Chief Marketing Officer. Her distinguished record and forward-thinking approach have been instrumental in Meredith achieving many key milestones, including the establishment of the Meredith Data Studio. This suite of advertising solutions leverages the company’s rich, proprietary first-party data and predictive insights capabilities, helping to inform its partners’ marketing, product and business strategies. Under Borsa’s leadership, Meredith has also expanded its business partnerships with a wide array of retailers and blue chip marketers.
Prior to Meredith, Borsa held senior positions in the technology, telecommunications and consulting sectors. She worked at Nokia, Comcast and Accenture, developing and executing strategies to grow new and legacy businesses.
Borsa serves on the ANA’s Data & Technology Growth Council and the boards of directors of the Interactive Advertising Bureau; AdLedger, an industry blockchain trade group; and 4-H, a nonprofit youth development organization.
Alia AbbasAlia Abbas is a strategy and operations executive with extensive global digital transformation experience supporting Fortune 500 companies across various sectors and geographies driving organizational effectiveness and alignment and overcoming and embracing market disruptions. Her expertise in strategic planning, operational excellence, and program and change management, coupled with her broad background and strong cross-functional experience has exposed her to a wide range of business situations, challenges, and workstyles over her two- decade career.
Most recently, Alia was the Head of Business Operations for the technology organization at The Estee Lauder Companies where she collaborated across global leadership teams and the broader organization to facilitate and develop their digital transformation strategy and operating model, and simplify, digitize, and integrate core business processes as ELC embarked on their digital customer experience transformation. Prior to that, Alia led the strategic planning and execution of Time Warner’s unprecedented enterprise-wide strategic and operational transformation efforts in support of the company’s digital initiatives.
She holds an MBA from Cornell University’s S.C. Johnson Graduate School of Management, an MS from Stevens Institute of Technology in Management Information Systems, and a BS in Computer Science from Drexel University. Alia is on the Board of Advisor’s at Seton Hall University’s Skillman School of Business Customer Experience Program, and on the Board of Trustees and DEI committee of Trailblazers Camp, a nonprofit that empowers youth to build life values through outdoor experiential programs. Alia is a native New York-er and avid traveler.
Sheryl GoldsteinA “net vet” with 20+ years of driving meaningful revenue through insights into action consultative selling in the dynamic digital landscape (Yahoo, AOL, About.com). Adept at building successful sales teams, developing go-to-market sales strategies and gaining consensus across company divisions. Experience includes mobile, tech (DSP, PMP, Exchange) and data driven solutions, social media and word of mouth marketing, Website development and design, online media and marketing and cross-platform media experience (TV, Radio and live-event). A passionate leader and relationship builder who is committed to exceeding goals and expectations for clients, her team and company.
Michael HahnMichael Hahn is Executive Vice President & General Counsel at IAB and IAB Tech Lab. Michael has responsibility for all legal matters, including the direction of legal strategy, privacy compliance, antitrust compliance, intellectual property rights issues, and general corporate matters. Michael is also responsible for serving as an advocate for the digital advertising industry on common legal issues affecting member companies.
Michael joined IAB and IAB Tech Lab from Lowenstein Sandler LLP where he served as Vice Chair of the firm’s Antitrust Practice Group. In that role, he provided clients with strategic counsel around competition, distribution and governance issues. In the area of litigation, Michael’s matters have included multiparty class action antitrust defense representation.
Michael served previously as Co-Chair of the New Jersey State Bar Association Antitrust Law Committee. He also previously served on the Editorial Advisory Board of Competition Law 360 and the Advisory Board of the American Bar Association Antitrust Section’s Civil Torts & RICO Committee. Michael frequently publishes on a range of legal and policy issues.
Michael earned his B.A. in History and Political Science from Rutgers University, M.P.P. from Georgetown University and J.D. for Georgetown University Law Center.
Carryl Pierre-DrewsCarryl Pierre-Drews is EVP, Chief Marketing Officer at the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB) where she is responsible for providing executive leadership and management of the IAB marketing and communications organization and activities to forward the IAB’s position as a digital, marketing, and media industry thought leader and agenda-setter. Carryl has stewardship of the IAB Brand inclusive of Events, Marketing, PR, Digital, Social, Mobile, Video, and Audio channels with the goal of elevating IAB’s profile with media and tech CEOs, CMOs, and the marketing and advertising industry at large.
Previously, Carryl held the title of Vice President of Marketing at Fullscreen, a next-gen social marketing agency, where she built and led the agency’s brand marketing, PR, digital/social channels, influencer engagements, and global industry activations featuring marketers from American Eagle, AT&T, HP, Marriott, Mars, Mattel, Visa and more. Carryl was instrumental in catalyzing key strategic decisions that drove business growth, elevated visibility, and increased shareholder value positioning Fullscreen for the AT&T acquisition in 2018 and eventual WarnerMedia integration in 2019. Prior to Fullscreen, Carryl was Senior Vice President of Strategic Marketing at USA Network, a division of NBCUniversal, where she led the integrated marketing, communications strategy, and client experiences teams.
Carryl serves as Chair of the Marketing & Communications Committee of Pet Partners Board of Directors, where she helps devise strategies to further communicate and expand the vital role of therapy animals in our lives. As a therapy animal team with her dog Mika, Carryl has seen firsthand the effect therapy animals have on overall health and well-being. Carryl is also passionate about creating a culture of inclusion and diversity in the advertising, marketing, and media industry and has been an active member of She Runs It, an organization invested in women’s achievement, for 19 years, with six spent on the Board (2012-2018). She was honored twice by CableFax Magazine as one of the most influential minorities in cable — in 2013 “The Leaders” and in 2012 “The Influentials.” In 2019 Carryl was nominated and became a founding member of Chief, a private network focused on connecting and supporting women leaders.
Lartease TiffithLartease Tiffith is the Executive Vice President for Public Policy at the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB). He leads IAB’s public policy team, which is responsible for advocating on behalf of IAB’s more than 700 member companies on complex issues, including consumer privacy, data security, global trade, international data transfer rules, and more. Lartease also leads IAB’s Public Policy Council, the marketing and media industry’s largest legislative and regulatory advisory group, with senior executives from more than 200 companies contributing to solutions to advance consumer benefits and economic growth. He also plays an important role in supporting IAB Tech Labs’ efforts to align the industry’s technical development and best practices.
Lartease joined IAB from Amazon, where he led the company’s public policy work around advertising, privacy, security, data governance, cross-border data flows, and consumer protection issues. In his role, he provided counsel to internal legal and business partners on global public policy matters to help guide the development of products, services, and internal policies. During his tenure at Amazon, INSIDER named him as one of the key players in politics and the tech world.
Prior to joining Amazon, Lartease served as Senior Counsel to then-U.S. Senator Kamala Harris, and Counsel to U.S. Senator Dianne Feinstein. Before working in the Senate, he practiced law at two international law firms (Kirkland & Ellis LLP and O’Melveny & Myers LLP) and the U.S. Department of Justice. Lartease began his legal career as a Law Clerk to the Honorable Roger L. Gregory, Circuit Judge, on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit.
Lartease earned his B.A., J.D., and M.B.A. from Northwestern University.
Jeanie CarstensenJeanie Carstensen is the Senior Vice President, Finance and Operations of Finance and Operations. She joined the IAB in October 2015 with 20+ years experience in the media and entertainment industries. Most recently she was with Comcast/NBCUniversal as a strategic finance and administration leader supporting the Cable Ad Sales Division. Prior to that she held finance leadership roles at Viacom/MTV Networks in New York and MTV Europe in London, England.
Jeanie holds a BA in Finance from Iona College, is an avid traveler, and volunteers with Monday Night Hospitality serving restaurant style meals to those in need.
Rick BergerRick has significant experience across all sides of the marketing ecosystem including brand management, agency, media, digital, ad tech, data, analytics, and attribution. He started his career working on blue chip brands for several major NY ad agencies and then transitioned to the brand side at L’Oreal. After a successful stint launching and managing haircare brands, Rick took on a role running sales for Next Generation Radio, an industry association charged with generating new on-air and digital revenue. In nine years, NGR generated over $125M in new sales to the industry. After leaving NGR, Rick ran the NY Sales office for Alloy, helping to launch the largest teen ad network. Rick has also run sales teams at Music Mogul (a music start-up), Interactive One (a multi-cultural publisher), Specific Media/Viant (the largest ad network) and inPowered (a native platform). Most recently, Rick has been with Conversant, the identity platform and digital arm of Epsilon. In this role, Rick has been the lead revenue generator for Conversant’s emerging Restaurant segment.
Craig ColemanCraig Coleman joins IAB with over 15 years of expertise developing marketing programs, messaging, and positioning strategies for IAB member brands such as USA TODAY, NBCUniversal, and MTV. He is excited to raise the profile of the IAB brand and positioning IAB as the industry thought leader in media and marketing.
Most recently, Coleman was VP, Client Solutions and Product Marketing for Gannett Digital and USA TODAY where he led digital product marketing and client solutions. Under his leadership, USA TODAY launched the award winning Gravity unit and introduced digital partnerships in virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR).
In previous roles, Coleman served as Vice President, Marketing for Screenvision where he launched a new branded content offering combining media, movie studio and partner assets. While at NBCUniversal, he was brand manager of the lifestyle brands Green is Universal, Healthy at NBCU and Hispanics at NBCU and oversaw the development and implementation of integrated ad sales marketing programs for advertisers across NBCUniversal’s portfolio including the first-ever movie studio program with Sony. Prior to joining NBCUniversal in 2010, Coleman directed all marketing and communications for the fastest growing kid’s network, Nicktoons Network. Coleman also co-produced the Nicktoons Network Animation Festival driving festival submissions and partnerships with LEGO, Addicting Games and mtvU making it the largest animation festival in North America.
Coleman earned a Bachelor’s degree from University of Connecticut, and currently resides in CT with his wife, Evan, and daughter, Bennett.
Libby MorganLibby Morgan comes to IAB with over twenty years of agency and consulting experience, spending most of her career at the intersection of Marketing, Technology and Innovation. Most recently, she served as the Global President of MRM Commerce, where she launched the Strategy, Consulting, and Digital Transformation practice. Previous positions also include President of The Born Group, where she focused on Digital Marketing, Commerce and Content, and Managing Director of iCrossing (part of Hearst), where she focused on Media and Digital Marketing. Throughout her career, she has had the good fortune to partner with clients such as Nestle, General Motors, Anheuser Busch, American Express, and Geico, among others, to help them achieve their business goals through interactive solutions.
Shailley SinghShailley brings several years of product management experience in Digital advertising at Yahoo and Say Media building products for Mobile advertising, Ad Operations, Targeting solutions and integrating data platforms. Shailley has supported and worked with multiple IAB initiatives in the past namely MRAID and Mobile Rising Stars specifications. At Yahoo, he worked on creating innovative ad experiences for mobile and tablet platforms as well as native formats. Shailley has a diverse background as a product leader, consultant and entrepreneur building and sustaining high performing teams at both large organizations as well as venture funded startups like Paypal, Yahoo, Say Media, Serus, Accenture, PwC. By way of qualifications, Shailley has an MBA and Chemical engineering degree.
Alexandra SalomonAlexandra Salomon joined the IAB Tech Lab in 2018 to lead global business development efforts for the organization, spearheading growth around the world and across the value chain. After heading up International for the Interactive Advertising Bureau for 5 years, she brings more than 25 years of business development and global marketing experience to the team, including two decades specifically in Digital.
A veteran in online advertising and interactive marketing, Salomon has worked for leading brands such as AOL, Yahoo, Zinio, and Disney Publishing. She was born in the U.K, grew up in France, and is not only multi-lingual but truly multicultural.
Angelina EngA seasoned executive with 24+ years of digital media, marketing and operations experience, Angelina Eng has focused her career on supporting agencies and brands to define, build and manage digital media and marketing efforts while enabling teams to operationally work efficiently and effectively with both internal and external partners and platforms. She’s been responsible for the development and management of internal systems and workflow, establishment of deliverable standards, designing ad trafficking and tracking guidelines, implementation of emerging platforms, as well as establishing best practices at companies such as Morgan Stanley, Merkle, Dentsu Aegis and Publicis Modem.
Over the years, She has been involved with multiple organizations and events to help define, establish and advocate some of the industry standards that we see in today’s digital media ecosystem (such as ad verification/brand safety, ad fraud, viewability and programmatic, social, etc)Angelina has been awarded the AdMonsters 2018 Power List, IAB Data Rockstar 2016 and AdMonsters Digital Media Leadership Award 2016.
Amber MuratAmber is the Vice President of Human Resources for IAB. She stepped into the role in May 2022 and has oversight of the organization’s human resource functions, including culture, diversity, inclusion, and all people-focused initiatives.
Amber is an Equity Designer, People Strategist, and an Authentic People & Culture leader. Amber joins IAB with 15 years of experience; in Human Resources leadership roles within nonprofit, mission-driven organizations. She brings a unique mix of human resources, executive coaching, and thought leadership expertise.
Most recently, Amber was the Head of People & Culture at Sollis Health, where she launched the company’s first-ever human resources strategy and led the organization through a culture transformation. She holds a master’s degree in Human Resources Development from Fordham University, a senior professional human resources designation, and multiple professional coaching certifications from iPEC & IIN. In 2020, Disruptor Magazine named Amber one of the Top 30 Life Coaches to Look Out For in 2021.
Eric JohnEric John leads IAB’s Media Center, a dedicated unit within the IAB whose mission is to simplify the video supply chain, providing best practices and education for brands, agencies, and media companies to drive continued growth through the evolving convergence of television and digital video. Eric drives the center’s efforts in the development of market-making research, industry standards and best practices and buyer/seller terms and conditions. Before joining the IAB, Eric led digital services and strategy at the Alliance for Audited Media and the MPA. Eric also served as global director of publisher marketing at Nokia, managing the company’s world-wide mobile app developer ecosystem. Prior to Nokia, Eric launched and led advertiser brand engagement solutions for Yahoo!, creating advanced, data-driven video, mobile and interactive campaigns for brands such as Pepsi, Loreal and Nikon. Eric began his career in internet advertising at DoubleClick (Google) where he served in business and product development within the DART for Publishers (DFP) and DART for Advertisers (DFA) business units where he launched the industry’s first post-click “Spotlight” measurement tools. Eric is an alumnus of Miami of Ohio (BA) and Indiana University (MA) and is a graduate of Columbia University’s Product Management Program.
Read articles by Eric John.
Zoe SoonZoe Soon has 10+ years of experience building products in technology-driven businesses with a heavy focus on mobile. Six years ago Zoe flew 21 hours from Sydney to NYC for a 30min coffee meeting which led to her first job in NYC. Since then she’s worked with three major New York based media companies, The New York Times, Condé Nast and Business Insider on projects ranging from location-based apps to paywalls. Zoe began her career as a user researcher and UX design consultant working with three of the top five banks in Australia. She was then hired to establish a user insights practice at Fairfax Media, a leading Australian news and media conglomerate. Here she led the user research for the flagship news apps which won Best Mobile News Product at the 2012 Australian Mobile Awards and went on to become product lead for the news sites. In this role she launched a content paywall and a unified user data system to diversify revenue and enable more targeted marketing.
Prior to joining the IAB Zoe was General Manager of apps and email at Business Insider where she was charged with defining the go-to market strategy for these platforms. In this role Zoe launched Insider Inc’s first OTT apps across Apple, Amazon Fire and Roku offering advertisers cross-platform video digital distribution and access to an audience that generates over 2 billion views each month.
Zoe has a Masters in Organizational Psychology and lives in New York. She enjoys burning pancakes, Cuban salsa dancing and talking to strangers in line.
Chris BruderleChris Bruderle brings over 20 years of experience in Data/Web Analytics and Media Market Research at premium Digital and Muti-Platform web publishers including The Daily Beast, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, Conde Nast Publications and This Old House Ventures.
Most recently, Chris was VP, Analytics & Research at The Daily Beast where he spent nearly 7 years and was responsible for the tracking, analysis and reporting of The Daily Beast’s O&O site and off-platform data/analytics for Senior/Corporate Management, Editorial, Advertising Sales, Product/Engineering, Audience/Business Development, Social Media and PR. He established the company-wide Editorial Analytics and Advertising Sales data and research stacks which included, among others, Google Analytics, Parse.ly, Krux DMP, Optimizely, comScore, Kantar, Samba, Newswhip, Crowd Tangle, Buzzsumo, and CrazyEgg.
Prior to The Daily Beast, Chris spent 5 years as Associate and Acting Director at Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia where he directed the correspondence and development of all research-based strategies supporting the Advertising Sales and Marketing staffs of each of the MSLO media brands and platforms across digital, mobile/tablet, TV, print and radio.
Chris started his career at BBDO as an Assistant Media Planner where he most notably completed the “Media Training Program”.
Chris earned a Bachelor’s of Arts in English and Communications from Fairfield University in Fairfield, Connecticut.
Alex ConeAlex joined Tech Lab in early 2020 after 7 years at Xandr (formerly AppNexus) where he lead multiple product and engineering groups to deliver a broad range of successful ad tech products. Alex stood up Xandr’s Privacy product and engineering capability in 2018 and since realized digital privacy is the area of advertising where he can make the most impact to the industry and consumers. Alex believes Tech Lab–with its global reach, technology focus, diverse membership and trade group relationships–is uniquely positioned as a place where he can leave a positive lasting mark on privacy.
Conor HealyJessalin LamJessalin Lam is a learning and development leader, DEI champion, and mentor with over 10 years of combined experience across L&D, DEI, marketing, partnerships, business development, and consulting. Jessalin is a lifelong learner and connector who loves to cultivate learning cultures and empower people to thrive and seize their potential with a growth mindset.
Jessalin joined IAB from TBWA\Worldwide, where she was the Precision Marketing Academy Director for the Nissan account leading a global employee training program across the agency and client. Prior to that, she worked at the American Association of Advertising Agencies (4A’s), where she consulted with agency HR partners and leaders to help them develop their talent from entry-level to executive level across various trainings.
In 2021, Jessalin was elected to the Association for Talent Development NYC Board of Directors. She is also the Co-Founder of Asians in Advertising, a community focused on creating opportunities for Asians and elevating them to higher leadership positions.
Rachel McEnerneyOver the course of her 15 year career, Rachel has had the honor of working at some of the most respected companies in the industry. Getting her start at Edelman PR, she focused primarily on forging and executing media and content partnerships with broadcast and digital properties on behalf of clients. Her subsequent roles supporting cable ad sales at NBCUniversal and the CNÉ sales team at Condé Nast fully immersed her in the world of digital media and sales marketing and set her up for success when she joined Vevo to lead their Ad Sales Marketing team. During her five years with the music video platform, Rachel was a respected leader within the sales organization and focused her efforts on innovating strategic solutions for client partners and crafting complex go-to-market products and narratives in support of Vevo’s global salesforce.
Michael TexidorBrendan ThomasBrendan is IAB’s Vice President of Policy Communications, helping to create greater awareness among policy makers and the press of digital advertising’s importance to technological and economic progress, creativity, and the ad-supported internet.
He works closely with IAB’s legal and public policy experts, as well as more than 700 IAB members, to enhance public understanding of digital marketing and advertising’s value to small businesses and their customers, and the industry’s innovations to online commerce, personal data protection and privacy, and more.
Prior to joining IAB, Brendan directed policy communications for members of Congress and for a major trade association. A graduate of Northwestern University, he received his Master’s Degree from University of Southern California and worked as a reporter and producer in the news and entertainment industries in New York and Los Angeles.
Benjamin DickBen is Director, Data & Ad Effectiveness within IAB’s Data Center of Excellence. He leads IAB projects within its automation, identity, measurement/attribution groups, and works with leading ad technologists, agencies and publishers to identify and navigate some of the most pressing opportunities and challenges within these verticals. By developing best practices, research, white papers, and thought leadership in collaboration with IAB members, Ben helps improve and facilitate digital media buying and selling via automated tools, software and data.
Prior to joining the IAB, Ben was Associate Director, Digital Trading at GroupM where he oversaw programmatic strategy, measurement / optimization, ad operations, and private marketplace relationships across Nestlé 85 brand US portfolio. In this capacity he was responsible for building and “productizing” the Nestlé Trade Desk (NTD), an independent programmatic buying unit developed specifically to service Nestle brands. Prior to his work on Nestlé, Ben held positions at both Maxus Global and Universal McCann where he helped lead the development of programmatic and measurement/attribution strategies for large global brands including MasterCard, Barclays, Harvard Business School, and Welch’s.
Ben received a B.S. in Communications and Entrepreneurship from the S.I. Newhouse School of Public Communications at Syracuse University and resides in Brooklyn, NY.
John GriffertyErick HarrisErick currently serves as Legislative Director and Senior Counsel to Congressman Steve Chabot (OH). In addition to handling the judiciary portfolio, Erick focuses on financial services, tax, labor, and technology issues. Erick formerly served as Legislative Counsel to Congresswoman Emerson (MO) and as an aide to Senator Jim Talent (MO) and at the U.S. Department of Justice in the Office of the Solicitor General.
While completing his law degree, Erick served on the Wiley Rutledge Moot Court Board and as Senior Editor of the Washington University Jurisprudence Review. He appeared on various media outlets to discuss the 2008 Presidential election.
Erick received his Juris Doctor from Washington University in St. Louis, School of Law and his Bachelor of Science Degree from Vanderbilt University in Political Science and Human and Organizational Development with a concentration on Public Policy. While studying at Vanderbilt, Erick served on the Honor Council and completed internships with the U.S. House of Representatives, the U.S. Senate, the British House of Commons, and at the White House.
Erick is originally from Cape Girardeau, Missouri and he and his wife, Bridgette currently reside in Washington D.C with their miniature goldendoodle, Vandy.
Nicole HorsfordNicole joins the IAB as Senior Manager in the Member Services department. In this role she strategically engages and recruits IAB membership through the creation of our many offerings and events. Nicole draws from her wealth of industry experience both on the buy side, having worked for Saatchi and Saatchi, and on the sell side at Oddcast and Westwood One. Her natural curiosity and desire to learn the industry also landed her experience client side, working as a Marketing Manager for Emblem Health. Nicole graduated from Fordham University with a BA in Communications & Media Studies, as well as a business degree. Her latest curiosity is travel, and when not working she tries to discover as many new places as possible.
Deleela JonesDeleela Jones was most recently head of B2B marketing at Live Nation Entertainment where she was responsible for building Live Nation’s value proposition to advertisers and promoting the brand’s thought-leadership.
Prior to joining Live Nation, Deleela was Senior Director of Industry & Agency Marketing at Pandora Media where she led strategy, planning and execution of Pandora’s high impact industry events and agency programs.
Throughout her professional career, Deleela has held marketing leadership positions at some of the biggest media brands in the world, including USA TODAY/Gannett, Yahoo! and Univision Communications. She is known for helping to drive revenue for high-performing sales organizations and the ability to forge strategic partnerships.
Deleela earned an M.B.A. in marketing from Baruch College in NYC and a Bachelor of Arts with Distinction in telecommunications from Penn State University.
Kathleen McKayKathleen has been the Event Director at IAB since 2018. In this role, she and the events team are responsible for all the behind-the-scenes magic that bring an event to life. Prior to joining IAB, Kathleen worked for over 10 years in the meeting and events industry. Most recently as the Senior Manager, Special Event for the David Lynch Foundation and the Event Director at IQPC, a leading conference company.
In her spare time, she loves to travel, explore the NYC/Hoboken restaurant scene, go on brewery tours, binge watch Law & Order, and spend time with her boyfriend and nieces.
Kathleen received her Bachelors of Science from James Madison University and currently resides in Hoboken, NJ.
Mayank MishraMayank is a visionary technologist, bringing several years of thoughtful leadership in all stages of technology design, development, execution in support of a product vision and road-map with experience from large corporations to early startups adept in conceiving, defining, developing, & launching Web & mobile applications.
He has designed system software, Middleware, eCommerce and Mobile platform/apps for Fortune 50 corporations to startups for companies like IBM, Appssavvy,Kickapps and Flurry.
With certifications like PMI, Java/J2EE, Business Rules and also being speaker at developer conferences, he loves learning new technology and designing platforms.
With several mobile apps in app store and SDK’s running on thousand of devices, he loves to spend time in building mobile and wearable apps or playing guitar.
Nicole PellegrinoNicole Pellegrino joins the IAB most recently from Outbrain where she worked with leading publishers to monetize and diversify revenue streams. Prior to Outbrain, Nicole held various roles at InStyle, Conde Nast, VEVO and Specific Media/VIANT where she focused her time collaborating with brands to create multi-platform solutions and branded content programs. With a foundation in strategic planning/buying, Nicole is passionate about media and the world of interactive marketing.
Outside of the office you can find Nicole spending time with her husband and beautiful daughter, cooking a delicious Italian meal or enjoying an 80s Peloton ride.
Joe PillaJoe Pilla joined IAB in Summer of 2018 as Director, Data & Automation within the IAB Programmatic+Data Center. In his role, Joe works closely with Orchid Richardson, VP, Managing Director on a variety of projects related to data transparency, attribution modeling and the changing consumer experience.
Joe brings a wealth of diverse media experience to IAB from his accomplished career in advertising research and consumer insights. Previously, Joe was Vice President, Social Insights at Zenith Media where he led the Social Intelligence practice providing clients with data analysis related to their brand environment, online conversation and campaign performance. Joe spearheaded several agency thought leadership initiatives covering a wide spectrum of topics including brand integrations, the rise of Influencer Marketing, shifts in consumer behavior, and the relationship between televised tent pole events and Social Media channels.
Prior to Zenith, Joe was the Associate Director of Media & Consumer Insights at Mindshare where he led the adoption of The Loop, the agency’s global operating system linking real-time multimedia insights to real-time actions. Naturally curious, Joe excelled at developing the annual US Consumer Trends presenting the agency perspective to clients nationwide. Before making a move to the agency world, Joe honed his storytelling expertise at Condè Nast, Meredith Corporation and Reader’s Digest where he mastered syndicated research bringing the magazine consumer to life.
Joe earned a Bachelor’s of Science in Marketing from Rutgers University. He lives in Long Island City with his husband Kevin Davis, AIA. Joe sits on the board of SuperCommunityLIC, a local organization celebrating the local community while finding ways to give back. In his spare time, Joe produces his YouTube Channel “Pop Culture Monger” dedicated to the latest entertainment news with the tagline nonsense to follow.
Soizic SacrezJill WittkoppJill Wittkopp is Senior Director of Management at the IAB Tech Lab, a global consortium for technical standards in the digital advertising industry. Prior to joining the IAB Tech Lab, Jill worked on the buy side of programmatic advertising with companies like MyBuys, Magnetic and Rakuten. She has a B.A. in English from the University of Michigan, Dearborn and lives in San Francisco, California.
Jarrett WoldJarrett Wold comes to the IAB Tech Lab with a diverse background in technology leading teams focused on digital applications. His most recent role was Director of Technology and Platforms at Ad-ID, where he was overseeing Ad-ID’s technology endeavors and focusing on industry standards for the advertising ecosystem. His former role as Director of Technology includes Ad-ID, Rodale, Inc. and HealthiNation. He also worked at AOL on AOL Video, AOL Search, and Moviefone. He graduated from Syracuse University and is a huge Orange fan!Luz BritoCameron BurnhamCameron is a pioneer of the digital media industry having worked at iconic industry brands like Yahoo!, News Corp, and Twitter.
For the last 20 years, his career has spanned across sales, strategic partnerships, business development, and sales management roles with a consultative approach that’s delivered trusted and value-driven partnerships.
His industry experience runs across Digital Display, Video/OTT, Social, DOOH, Programmatic, and SaaS. Most recently, Cameron has focused his work around deterministic, people-based, activation’s and omni-channel attribution initiatives with the purpose of providing incremental revenue and scaling wanted business impact.
A passionate industry professional and relationship builder who is committed to exceeding goals and expectations for partners, his team and company.
Rowena LamRowena brings years of experience in product development of ad-supported casual games on mobile and web. Most recently, she led product at Jump Ramp Games where she was responsible for the strategic direction and vision of the consumer-facing mobile apps. This included the development and launch of several games, supporting internal tools, and ad monetization services. In addition to product leadership, Rowena also has a background in digital marketing. In her spare time, Rowena enjoys trying out new recipes and traveling.
Mina PajevicMatt ShapoMatt Shapo is a product development and digital strategy leader who brings more than 20 years of experience overseeing the creation and multi-platform delivery of online content and internet advertising to his role as the Director of Digital Audio and Video at the IAB.
Before IAB, Matt served as VP of Digital Content for the All Access Music Group, a music marketing company and audio industry news publisher where he planned and led advertising, editorial, and other growth initiatives for AllAccess.com, a B2B website that delivers breaking news, data, and commentary to an audience of professional audio content creators, salespeople, and decisionmakers.
Over the course of his career, Matt has directed and measured the effectiveness of integrated advertising and email marketing campaigns for multiple leading record labels and radio companies. He has also led the ideation, development, launch, and continuous iteration of profitable digital media products, including an industry leading digital audio distribution platform that delivers new music and related content to a nationwide user base of radio stations, streaming services, tv networks, podcasters, and others.
Matt holds a B.A. in Political Science and International Relations from Tufts University and an M.F.A. in Radio, TV, and Film Production from Florida State University, and he is a devoted fan of his hometown Miami Dolphins. He lives with his wife, Jennifer, and their wonderful son Evan, in Randolph, NJ where he is an enthusiastic hiker and a proud member of the Randolph High School Marching Rams parents’ road crew.
Colleen ShieldsColleen Shields joined the IAB in 2012, and supports the IAB Tech Lab in advancing the team’s work of producing protocols and tools that help companies implement global industry technical standards. Colleen is a native Wisconsinite, though she has lived in London and Sydney previously. In her spare time she enjoys attending storytelling and comedy events around New York, pointing out that all things great in the world stem from Wisconsin, hiding her North-woods accent, and working on silversmithing in her basement.
Brooke StevensElizabeth AcayanAs a CMS (content management system) admin and project coordinator, Elizabeth is involved with content, page creation, and maintenance of the website. She plans, customizes and integrates third party softwares and applications with the website for the best possible user experience.
Brian AlbertBrian Albert leads the US Google/YouTube media partnerships team, driving strategic display & video deals with our largest advertising clients and agency partners. He also is responsible for all Google Preferred & other YouTube premium video upfront negotiations. Before this, Brian led a team which enabled independent media & creative agencies to unlock value across Google's media properties & technology platforms.
Prior to Google, Brian spent 15+ years as a labor & employment attorney, sports marketer representing professional athletes, Internet entrepreneur at 3 early stage start-ups and digital marketing agency executive.
He served on the Ad Council's inaugural Social Impact Council in 2016 and currently supports YouTube’s involvement with the IAB Digital Content NewFronts. A graduate of The University of Michigan and The George Washington University Law School, Brian resides just outside Boston, MA with his wife and son.
LaToya AndersonI have 20 years experience in accounting and administration. Before joining IAB, I started my career as a Client Associate at Chase Manhattan Bank in Global Trading. I then moved on from Chase and started working at Bank of New York as a Financial Analyst in Investment Management. I decided I wanted to try a little something different and started working at Long Island University as a Executive Assistant. I enjoyed it and it definitely was too easy so I went back to accounting. I started working at Major Food Group (Carbone, Sadelles, The Grill, and Lobster Club to name a few) a very well known Hospitality Group as a Staff Accountant.
I love traveling with my two amazing daughters Tatiana and Tiana along with my significant other. I enjoy watching Football and I am a huge fan of the Philadelphia Eagles. When I visit my country Belize I volunteer at the Orphanage Child Care Program.
I am a alumni of Berkeley College where I received my degree in Accounting. I am a member of the National Black Accountants Association.
Renie AndersonRenie Anderson was named Chief Revenue Officer and Executive Vice President, NFL Partnerships in March of 2019. In this role, Anderson oversees the League’s partnership divisions, including sponsorship, new business, consumer products, and media sales.
Anderson manages a team that creates new partnerships in open categories and maintains the relationships and activation of the NFL’s current corporate sponsors and licensees, including blue-chip companies such as Pepsi, Microsoft, P&G, Verizon, Bose, Nike, New Era, EA, and many more. In addition to partnerships, Anderson is also responsible for all media sales for the League’s owned and operated media assets, including NFL Network and NFL Digital Media.
Anderson, who joined the National Football League in 2006 after nine seasons at the Arena Football League, has garnered numerous awards and accolades. She is a Hall of Fame honoree of the Sports Business Journal’s prestigious Forty Under 40 award; an Ad Age 40 Under 40 winner; a 2016 WISE Woman of the Year; a Sports Business Journal “Game Changer”; and was named one of “The Most Powerful Women in Sports” by Adweek.
Anderson graduated from the University of Mississippi in 1997 with a degree in Journalism and resides in Darien, Conn., with her husband Chris McCloskey and daughters Callie and Kate.
Kyle AntoianKyle Antoian is the Vice President, Strategic Partnerships at Epsilon, responsible for identifying and integrating new partnership opportunities into the company’s product line. Antoian helps lead the strategic partnerships group at Epsilon and focuses on data commercialization, new product incubation, and partnerships.
Kyle joined Epsilon from Datran Media where he led strategic partnership expansion with a focus on growing the user base of publishers and sustaining and prospecting match partners. Prior to that he was Marketing Manager at Takkle Inc, tasked with new customer acquisition and analytics.
Kyle holds a bachelor’s degree in Economics from Duke University. He is the assistant coach of Philadelphia-Whitemarsh Rugby Football Club and sits on the board of the Eastern Pennsylvania Rugby Union.
Yoav ArnsteinYoav Arnstein is the Director of Product Marketing for Publisher Solutions in Facebook’s London office. Yoav joined Facebook from LiveRail. Previously, he was at Legolas Media where he was CEO and grew the company to a multi-million dollar revenue business. Prior to Legolas, Yoav was at Eyeblaster (now MediaMind) where he was GM International, and then GM North American operations. At Eyeblaster, Yoav oversaw revenue growth of more than 5x, opened multiple international offices and helped build Eyeblaster into the world’s leading rich media ad platform. Yoav holds a B.Sc in Computer Science and Statistics from Tel-Aviv University and an M.Sc. in Computer Engineering from Denmark’s Technical University.
Craig AtkinsonAs Chief Digital and Operating Officer at PHD USA, Craig maintains a dual role with oversight of the agency overall as well as serving as the champion of thought leadership and innovation focused on the agency’s output.
Craig came to PHD after 6+ years at sister agencies OMD and Omnicom Media Group where, most recently he served as Chief of Acquisitions, North America, leading strategic and corporate development for Omnicom Media Group, with a particular focus on emerging areas of digital channels including search marketing, mobile, social media and content development. In addition, Craig was the overall owner of the client relationship for the McDonald’s US business at OMD.
Before taking on the Acquisitions role, Craig served as Midwest Regional Director at OMD and was responsible for the strategic direction and regional oversight of OMD’s Chicago operations.
Craig has held positions within digital marketing since its inception in the mid 1990’s, playing key Account, Media and Strategy roles at Modem Media, Digitas, and Arc Worldwide leading digital marketing strategy and program development for such clients as Intel, Michelin, HP, the U.S. Army and Allstate. Craig also spent two years on the client side working inside Washington Mutual’s ecommerce group as a product manager, leading development of applications to acquire and securitize mortgage backed loans.
A frequent speaker and recognized thought leader in the emerging and digital marketing landscape, Craig is regularly quoted in such publications as The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, Advertising Age and Adweek.
Craig is a graduate of the University of Vermont, recently relocated to the NY area and is thoroughly enjoying eating his way through his new neighborhood in Brooklyn with his wife Nikki and sons Jake and Sam.
Matthew AzarkMatt has worked in digital media for over 12 years with stops at companies like[email protected], CBS Interactive, and Undertone. He currently lives in Park Slope, Brooklyn with his wife (who is also in the industry) and 4-year-old son.
Sheri BachsteinSheri Bachstein leads the consumer division for The Weather Company, an IBM Business (Weather). This includes overseeing all aspects of The Weather Channel and Weather Underground consumer properties, including product management and design, content development and global expansion across the organization on Weather’s owned and operated properties.
Sheri has played a role on many different aspects of The Weather Channel digital properties since joining in 2007. Previously she was head of global audience growth and has also led international consumer product for weather.com and The Weather Channel apps. While leading web efforts, she moved weather.com to a fully responsive site, improved SEO efforts, optimized referral traffic, and oversaw engagement and lifestyle sponsorship efforts. As vice president of product operations, Sheri’s overseen monetization, operations and the agile team. She’s also worked as a leader for audience products, as well as in product management for weather.com and global products.
But this isn’t her first stint at The Weather Channel. She worked previously for the television network as a producer and as part of the “storm tracking” team that went into the field to cover storms (1997-2000). Before returning to Weather, Sheri served as vice president of product and content at RMS Networks in Fort Lauderdale, FL. In her career she has also worked as a producer for WGNX-TV, Atlanta’s CBS affiliate.
Sheri is a member of Women in Cable Telecommunications (WICT) and has won multiple media awards, including an Emmy Award for breaking news coverage of the Atlanta Centennial Park bombing and an Associated Press Award for sports reporting.
An Atlanta native, Sheri received her bachelor’s degree in journalism from Georgia State University. She enjoys playing golf, traveling and cooking.
Rafeh BaigLalit BalchandaniPaul BannisterPaul is the Chief Strategy Officer at CafeMedia, the world’s largest ad management service, providing the technology and services that help the highest quality publishers grow their businesses and maximize success. The company serves over 3,000 independent publishers whose distinctive voices are shaping the open web. The company’s collective of creators reaches more than 160 million monthly unique visitors, ranking as the 11th largest digital entity and as #1 in Food, Family, and Home.Paul focuses on new product innovation, strategic partnerships, and corporate development at CafeMedia. During his time at CafeMedia, he led the company’s transition to a programmatic-first approach, spearheaded the early adoption of header bidding, and directed the transition to a publisher services model. Paul has worked in digital media and advertising since the mid-90s, starting a major video game publisher out of his parent’s basement. He worked for early internet pioneers including USWeb/CKS and CMP Media.
Airey BaringerAirey Baringer is Head of Product at Quantcast. At Quantcast, Airey is focused on developing product and business solutions at the intersection of privacy and advertising.
Previously, Airey led business and product development teams for consumer internet and SaaS products, including products focused on helping consumers complete their taxes, understand and act in accordance with the Affordable Care Act, and increase access to sustainable food products. In his free time, Airey is usually trail running, backpacking, cycling, and eating his way through the San Francisco Bay Area.
Lea BarthelemyLea brings diverse experiences ranging from B2B and B2C marketing, amongst other various industries. She is beyond excited to be joining the IAB marketing team!Christina BeaumierChristina Beaumier can get by in a few languages. She can order street food in Spanish and handle tribal negotiations in Burkina Faso in French. She understands the artist’s argot of her Northampton, MA hometown; comprehends the brainier dialects that originate at MIT, her alma mater; and is attuned to the intricacies of the Brooklyn accent, where she now lives with her family.
After a Peace Corps stint in Burkina Faso, and business school at MIT Sloan, Christina started her post-MBA career in investment banking, learning an analytical linguistics based on rigor and numbers. She was then exposed to the more creative syntax of the marketing world.
This path led her to Xaxis where she had a meteoric rise, starting as Director Strategic Engagements, then VP Global Client Development, then VP Media Product Development, and ultimately becoming SVP and leader of their digital ad unit. She was most recently a Strategic Partner Lead, Video Distributors and Telco, at Google, further solidifying her position as the Most Interesting Women in Ad Tech.
Her combined studies across continents and industries have made her into one of the most fluent translators in ad tech:Within ad tech, nothing is a silo! There’s always a business development angle, a client angle, a technology angle, a media angle, a product angle… so being able to speak different languages and relate to different stakeholders is a powerful tool to help bridge gaps and bring people together.
Christina now brings her encyclopedic experience and comprehensive understanding of the industry to her role as VP, Product, TV Platform for AT&T’s advertising and analytics company Xandr. She considers this to be the perfect place to bring everything together: the rigor of analytics and the stories of brands, finally translated into a message that people care to hear.
The future at AT&T is exciting and not without uncertainty, but Christina finds herself comfortable in imbalance. She believes that the essence of business and life is a commitment to always correcting those imbalances, and finding the best way forward.
Advertising needs to relearn how to communicate with humans; Christina is the polyglot for the job.
Tom BedecarréTom Bedecarré is one of the most influential leaders in advertising today. Recently named “Silicon Valley’s Favorite Adman” by Fortune Magazine, he was described as a rare hybrid who has cred with both Silicon Valley techies and advertising’s Mad Men.
Tom is CEO of AKQA, the world’s largest independent digital advertising agency. With 1,000 global employees, AKQA has offices in Amsterdam, Berlin, London, New York, San Francisco, Shanghai and Washington D.C. and serves leading clients including Audi, Heineken, Nike, Target, Visa and Xbox.
An enthusiastic entrepreneur, Tom has been an innovator and pioneer of the advertising and communications business over the last three decades. Previously, Tom was founder and CEO of Citron Haligman Bedecarré, San Francisco’s largest independent advertising agency and a leader in launching Internet brands.
Tom holds a BA degree from Stanford University and an MBA degree from the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University.
Jeff BenjaminJeff Benjamin, former Partner and Chief Creative Officer at Crispin Porter + Bogusky, joined JWT in 2012 as Chief Creative Officer, North America.
During his career, Jeff has navigated clients through the interactive landscape with great success, creating some of the world’s most pioneering and famous campaigns. His ability to lead multi-national marketers to experiment and break ground has continually opened up new doors for brands such as Best Buy, Coke Zero, Domino’s Pizza, Microsoft and Kraft. ‘Subservient Chicken’ and ‘Whopper Sacrifice,’ his campaigns for Burger King, are among the most successful viral marketing campaigns of all time.
Jeff has been recognized internationally by every major industry award show, winning the Grand Prix at Cannes in three different categories, Best of Show at the One Show, and the Grand Clio at the Clio Awards. He served as president of the Cyber Jury at Cannes in 2010, has been profiled in Fast Company and The New York Times, appeared in the ‘Creativity 50’ and is regularly called upon by television networks such as CNBC to comment on the state of the industry. His work has been showcased in numerous publications, including The Wall Street Journal, Communication Arts, Time, and Newsweek.
Varun BhagwanVarun Bhagwan is an executive with 20 years of experience leading numerous R&D projects from inception to delivery. Varun currently serves as Vice President of Product Management & Engineering at Verizon Media, where he is responsible for all Advertising Data Products: Targeting & Identity, Insights & Measurement, and Trust & Verification. Prior to the formation of Verizon Media, Varun held several leadership roles at Yahoo! focused on Data, Insights & Measurement as well as Mail Monetization Insights & Analytics.
Prior to joining Yahoo!, Varun worked in research for 12 years at IBM where his focus areas included text analytics, web-scale systems, information Integration, healthcare, and privacy.
Varun holds his Bachelor of Engineering in Electronics and Telecommunications Engineering from Maulana Azad National Institute of Technology, and his MS in Computer Science from University of Florida. Varun has invented or co-invented roughly 50 patents, is a Yahoo! Master Inventor, holds 10 honors & awards including Verizon’s top honor of the Verizon Credo Award, and produced more than 15 publications in top tier conferences and journals. Varun is also a frequent speaker at industry events and represents the company at events such as CES, Cannes Lions etc.
Sahiba BhatnagarSahiba Bhatnagar has a background in the nonprofit world, with experience at the David Lynch Foundation and UNICEF. While working for these companies, she gathered experience in administration, development, and events. Working galas and fundraisers for both these companies made her fall in love with putting together events.
Paige BilinsPaige Bilins leads Telaria’s global product team and is responsible for developing the company’s product strategy and designing and bringing to market proprietary yield and inventory management software solutions for premium video publishers across all screens and transaction types.
Prior to joining Telaria, Paige was SVP, Product Management at Freewheel where she spent over eight years. In that role, she led product strategy across two businesses resulting in double digit year-over-year growth. Ms. Bilins started her career at as a software engineer in the defense industry at Lockheed Martin and Northrop Grumman.
Paige holds a B.S. in Computer Science from Arizona State University as well as an MBA from Yale University.
Winston BinchWinston Binch is Chief Digital Officer, Deutsch North America, and one of the most accomplished digital marketing leaders and innovators of his generation. Over the past 15 years, he’s developed some of the industry’s most influential and meaningful digital campaigns, products, and experiences, bringing customization to Nike by way of Nike iD and the Pizza Tracker to Domino’s, Whopper Sacrifice to Burger King, and reinventing Volkswagen’s approach to online car shopping. He has also advised countless global brands and conglomerates on how to identify the marketing potential of the digital age, including American Express, Best Buy, Microsoft, Target, Pizza Hut, Vail Resorts, Sprint and Taco Bell. An educator and humanitarian at heart, Winston is co-founder of Boulder Digital Works at the University of Colorado, a digital continuing education program, and sits on the board of Protect Our Winters, a non-profit organization against climate change. See what he’s up to on Twitter or Instagram @winstonbinch.
Lincoln BjorkmanMarcela BonancioMarcela is an Executive Assistant that has been working with C- level in the marketing/ media/ advertising industry for over 10 years.
Renee BourneRenee Bourne is a dynamic and resourceful professional, with an exceptional background working in the ever changing, fast-paced events industry. Prior to joining IAB, Renee has worked at Dow Jones and Black Enterprise as their Sponsorship Manager. She comes with a plethora of experience handling best in class brand management for assigned accounts that brings cross platform media campaigns & national event partnerships to life.
In her spare time Renee likes to travel with her two daughters and manage her online children’s boutique.
Renee received her Associates Degree from Long Island University C.W. Post and a Bachelor of Science from SUNY Empire College.
Dan BrackettDan is the CTO of Extreme Reach. He leads innovation and development with a customer-centric revision cycle, growing our industry-leading platform with new capabilities every two weeks. With over 15 years of experience in systems architecture, application design and development of leadership, Dan is known for developing transformative advertising technology solutions.
Conor BradyConor Brady is a Global Creative Director at Huge, where he works closely with creative teams across the agency’s offices in the United States, Europe and Latin America. Conor plays a critical role in Huge’s work on integrated marketing campaigns and business development.
Before joining Huge, Conor served as Chief Creative Officer at Organic, where he was responsible for overseeing the creative discipline across all offices in the United States and Europe. He has worked with many of the world’s largest brands, including Pepsi, Intel, Hilton Hotel Group, VW, BBC, Bank of America, P&G, Nike and Conde Nast.
Conor studied at the Royal College of Art and Middlesex University and holds a BA in graphic design. Conor is an avid cyclist and lives in Brooklyn with his wife. In his spare time, he runs Elcyclista, a journal for bike design and culture.
Brad BrinegarBrad has led Durham, North Carolina-based McKinney since 2002.
Since his arrival, McKinney has more than doubled in size by building one of the most innovative business models in the advertising industry, one that blurs the line between traditional and digital media. As a result, McKinney has been recognized as one of the best agencies in the country by Advertising Age. In 2008, Brad led a management buyback of the agency from French holding company Havas.
He is also on the board of the American Association of Advertising Agencies (4A’s) and founding chair of the Interactive Advertising Bureau’s (IAB’s) Agency Advisory Board.
An anthropology major at Dartmouth, where he rowed on the varsity crew and was editor-in-chief of the humor magazine, Brad also earned a finance MBA from Columbia. Before joining McKinney, he spent two decades at global advertising giant Leo Burnett in Chicago, rising from trainee to CEO of Leo Burnett USA.
Philippe BrowningDave CampanelliDavid Campanelli is a 19 year industry veteran and a homegrown Horizon talent. As Executive Vice President, Director of Video Investment, David is in charge of all Horizon’s national TV and premium digital video buying. David oversees such accounts as GEICO, Dish, Weight Watchers Burger King, Corona, LG, Little Caesars, Capital One and others. Over the past several years Horizon has seen its billings in the National arena skyrocket to now exceed $4.3B under David’s supervision.
David has spearheaded Horizon’s “video buying” approach, helping to break down the walls between traditional TV buying and digital video buying, resulting in innovative deals on behalf of his clients. Also, he has established and oversees Horizon’s sports buying unit, which has become one of the largest sports spenders in the industry, have placed major sports platforms such as the Capital One Orange Bowl.
More recently David has set his sights on the advanced TV marketplace, creating Horizon Advanced, a dedicated team to lead Horizon’s path forward in the emerging world of data informed, programmatic and Over The Top TV.
David has already garnered some of the industry’s top honors, including winning a CableFax “Sweet 16” award and the Mediaweek All-Star Award in the National TV category.
Andrew CasaleAs President and CEO of Index Exchange, Andrew leads 300 of the brightest minds in advertising technology across the U.S., Canada and Europe. With a sharp focus on delivering benefits to media companies like The New York Times, Hearst, Daily Mail and Conde Nast as they tackle the world of automation, he’s built Index Exchange as one of the only pure-play and transparent ad exchanges in the advertising ecosystem. While he’s responsible for providing strategic direction and market vision to the company at large, he’s also hands on with all day-to-day corporate operations.
Andrew has a unique penchant for the advertising industry and the promise of its automated future. At only age 15, he was a strategic advisor for his family company, Casale Media – one of the first ad tech startups built to help marketers manage online ad inventory. 15 years later, he’s pivoted his family’s company Casale Media into Index Exchange. By doubling down on investments in engineering and infrastructure, he’s continued to grow the company’s revenue by over 100% y/y and adding headcount when needed to bolster the company’s offering.
As a respected industry thought leader, Andrew is widely sought-after for his expertise and opinions on programmatic and exchange-traded media, and the growing need to transact with transparency at the forefront of the conversation. Andrew’s bylines and media contributions have appeared in numerous publications including Ad Age, Adweek, AdExchanger, The New York Times and The Wall Street Journal.
Karen CaulfieldKaren leads Acxiom’s data product division with responsibility for data product strategy and the expansion of Acxiom’s data capabilities in the US and across global markets. Karen’s expertise lies in the design, development, and implementation of customer targeting and engagement strategies. Karen has deep experience across all aspects of the data ecosystem and is an expert on the nuances and complexities of the global data landscape with significant on-the-ground experience across EMEA, Latin America, Asia Pacific, and North America.
Before joining Acxiom Karen was Vice President of Global Data Solutions at Merkle where she focused on expanding Merkle’s data solutions into new global markets as well as working with clients to expand their CRM strategies across geographies. Prior to that, she held multiple roles in Europe and the Americas with ICLP – the global loyalty agencyJoe CepollinaJoe has 25 years of experience in both digital and physical product development leadership. He currently leads content and search advertising, as well as homepage experiences, for Microsoft News. His teams have driven a host of novel technical and product innovations in the area of native advertising, including implementation of new server-side delivery mechanisms that improve user experience, fraud rates, breakage, and yield. Joe’s passion with respect to advertising is ensuring that digital advertising is used as a force for good, allowing consumers access to trusted and valuable experiences that they would not otherwise be able to afford, or be willing to pay for. His current professional focus areas include developing industry-wide solutions that allow users to safely and proactively share information with publishers and advertisers, as well as innovating on business models in ways that help content publishers achieve sustainable economics.
Tal ChalozinTal Chalozin is Co-Founder & CTO of Innovid, the industry leader in interactive video advertising. As CTO of Innovid, Mr. Chalozin is responsible for technology development and implementation, product creation and business development activities across the company.
Mr. Chalozin is a multi-disciplinary entrepreneur, in early 2006 he co-founded the GarageGeeks (www.garageGeeks.org), a non for profit organization for creative people to meet, innovate and build noncommercial projects that would otherwise not come to life. GarageGeeks has grown to be one of Israel’s biggest “underground” organizations and its community consists of more than 1,000 active members. Prior to the GarageGeeks, Chalozin served as an officer in an elite computer unit in the Israeli Air Force for eight years, where he led the development of several military products with high algorithmic complexity.
Peter ChelalaPete Chelala is Viacom’s Vice President of Mobile and Video Partner Solutions where he focuses on driving strategy and development of mobile and video ad sales products across Viacom Media Networks’ Music, Entertainment, Kids and Family brands. He joined Viacom from The Weather Channel where he worked for the four years building and selling marketing solutions across the its mobile platform. Prior to The Weather Channel, Mr. Chelala spent three years in the online ad sales at both About.com and Yahoo!. Before moving into ad sales, he worked in production on commercials, music videos and feature films out of Los Angeles.
Debi ChirichellaDebi Chirichella is president of Hearst Magazines, one of the world’s largest publishers of monthly magazines, with 25 U.S. titles and close to 300 international editions, after serving as executive vice president, chief financial officer and director of global operations for Hearst Magazines.
She joined Hearst Magazines as senior vice president and chief financial officer in November 2011, overseeing the company’s strategic financial planning and reporting. Previously, Chirichella spent seven years at Condé Nast, where she served in a number of executive positions. From 2008 until early 2011, she was chief operating officer of Condé Nast Digital; simultaneously, beginning in 2010, she was COO of the Fairchild Fashion Group. Before that, she was chief financial officer of Condé Nast Publications.
Earlier in her career, Chirichella held several high-level planning, finance and operations roles at Primedia, and most recently, she served as CFO/COO at Prometheus Global Media.
Chirichella is a graduate of Princeton University and received her master’s degree in business from Harvard University. She currently resides in Mountain Lakes, New Jersey, with her husband and three children.
Brent ChoiVery few have had a run like Brent Choi over the past decade. Prior to being tapped to lead both J. Walter Thompson New York and Canada in 2015, Brent helped to transform the company’s Canadian operation, winning new business and leading the agency to be named Strategy’s 2015 Silver Agency of the Year. In fact, since 2000, Brent has helped two different agencies to become Agency of the Year in Canada.
Now, Brent drives industry-leading creative work for clients like Johnson & Johnson, Puma, Kellogg’s Special K, Tim Hortons, Air Canada, and more.
In 2013, Brent was the #2 ranked Chief Creative Officer in the world for his digital work, and consistently ranked as one of Canada’s top 10 creative directors. In the past few years, he has received several Cannes Lions (including two golds), multiple CLIOs and D&AD pencils, AdAge’s Top Five Ads of the Year, and was one of only 11 worldwide winners of the inaugural Fast Company Innovation Award. His work has also been featured numerous times in Mashable, Wired, Forbes, CNN, and Fast Company.
Some would say his creative success is because he started with a business degree from Ivey, one of Canada’s top business schools. Others will argue it’s in spite of it. At home he is a proud dad, insane NFL fan, and loving husband. His wife would add “In that order.”Halle ClemensPrior to joining Tech Lab, Halle worked as a production assistant on commercials for companies such Apple, Nike, Tostitos. During the pandemic, she was a volunteer teacher’s assistant at a refugee center, working with refugees from North Africa, the Middle East, and Central Asia.
Travis ClingerAs Senior Vice President of Addressability and Ecosystem at LiveRamp, Travis is responsible for leading the company’s global digital advertising ecosystem strategy: leading strategic initiatives, advancing global partnerships, and overseeing the business development and go-to-market strategies for key addressability products and initiatives. The Authenticated Traffic Solution is one such product, enabling publishers to link their first party identity to IdentityLink and then connect to the IdentityLink infrastructure LiveRamp has built across partner platforms to enable marketers to buy and measure on IdentityLink. Travis is a co-founder and Board Member of the Advertising ID Consortium, advocating for people-based identifiers to be transacted across the open Internet. Prior to joining LiveRamp, Travis was a director at Epic Systems responsible for implementing systems that managed sensitive healthcare information. Travis holds a BA in Political Science from Rollins College.
Paul holds a BSE, EECS from Princeton University, an MS in Computer Science from John Hopkins University and an MBA from the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania.
Dennis ColonChristine CookChristine Cook is senior vice president and chief revenue officer of CNN Digital, WarnerMedia Ad Sales. In this leadership position, Cook oversees sales strategy for CNN’s overall digital portfolio, which includes premium verticals, mobile products, programmatic, and emerging businesses. Based in New York, Cook reports to Joe Hogan, executive vice president of sales and marketing for WarnerMedia.
Cook plays a critical role in creating a holistic sales approach across CNN’s digital business, while strengthening digital revenue opportunities in line with the company’s go-to-market strategies. With a special focus on video, social and rich branded content campaigns, Cook also partners closely with the Content Partnerships team and Courageous brand studio to bring to life the KPIs of ad partners across CNN’s digital footprint.
Prior to joining WarnerMedia, Cook served as senior vice president and global head of advertising partnerships at Flipboard. During her six years at the company, Cook oversaw the global sales force and mobile-led revenue strategy. As an advisor, and then founding member of the advertising business team, she built the partnerships unit from the ground up, which was responsible for publisher partnerships, advertising sales, operations and creative brand marketing strategy. Prior to joining Flipboard in 2012, Cook held leadership roles at The Daily, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, IAC/InterActiveCorp, Financial Times, and New York Times Digital, where she founded the company’s first international sales office in London.
Cook was most recently named a 2020 She Runs It Changing the Game honoree. She also was honored as a 2019 Broadcasting & Cable Digital All-Star and on the 2018 Cynopsis Digital It List. She is an active member of the Internet Advertising Bureau (IAB), Mobile Marketing Association (MMA), Digital Ascendant, Digital Content Next, Advertising Women of New York/She Runs It, and New York Women in Communications. A graduate from Louisiana University with a Bachelor of Arts in English Literature, History and Spanish, Cook currently resides in New York City.
WarnerMedia is a leading media and entertainment company that creates and distributes premium and popular content from a diverse array of talented storytellers and journalists to global audiences through its consumer brands including: HBO, HBO Max, Warner Bros., TNT, TBS, truTV, CNN, DC, New Line, Cartoon Network, Adult Swim, Turner Classic Movies and others. The organization also includes Xandr’s suite of advanced advertising solutions designed to help to improve advertising for brands, publishers, and consumers. WarnerMedia is part of AT&T Inc. (NYSE:T).
Jim CowsertAs VP, Enterprise Brand, Advertising and Media, at Voya Financial, Jim leads brand strategy, creative development and media planning. Jim’s current focus is building the Voya Financial brand introduced in the fall of 2014. His responsibilities include ensuring Voya’s brand is effectively expressed across television, digital, mobile, social and search platforms for consumer and business audiences. He has a passion for developing high impact integrated initiatives with partners, building messaging across touch points, and driving a measurement based culture.
Prior to joining Voya Financial, Jim led agency and client teams developing and executing brand strategy, creative, and media for companies in financial, real estate, healthcare, and retail industries. He has MBA and BA degrees from Duke University and resides in Atlanta.
Susan CredleEvery agency says it wants “to do great creative,” but for Chief Creative Officer Susan Credle, it’s the reason why that matters. “Great creative has to build helpful, meaningful brands for the long-term,” she says. “That’s the sum of what we at Leo Burnett do, and what I’ve set out to do my entire career.”She came to Leo Burnett in the fall of 2009, after more than two decades at BBDO in which she rose from “bathroom-break girl” for the agency’s receptionists to EVP Executive Creative Director. There, Susan reinvented the iconic M&M’s characters; turned Cingular Wireless from a start-up into a leader brand; and created other consistently award-winning work for such clients as Bank of America, FedEx, Gillette, Lowe’s, PepsiCo, Pizza Hut and Visa.
Since joining Leo Burnett, Susan has spearheaded a creative renaissance at the agency through an eye for new top talent, a commitment to work that benefits brands and the world, and a vision for clients that always looks beyond a single campaign or ad.
Susan’s leadership, inspiration and in-the-trenches contributions have led to legacy-respecting yet forward-looking campaigns like McDonald’s Happy Meal “Happy Tales,” Kellogg’s Special K “What Will You Gain When You Lose?” Secret’s “Mean Stinks” anti-bullying campaign and, one of the most beloved and awarded platform ideas, Allstate’s “Mayhem.”“I believe in purpose-driven brands and having pride in something in lasts,” she says. “And, as we say here at Leo, that creativity can transform human behavior.”Susan serves on the Boards of the University of North Carolina’s School of Journalism and Mass Communication, the American Association of Advertising Agencies, the Foundation for EXXcellence and the Creative Circus. She is a member of the Economic Club of Chicago, the Media Council at the Paley Center for Media in New York, the Creative Review Board of the Ad Council and is a supporter of Marwen and One Million Degrees in Chicago.
Adrian D'SouzaRobert D’AsaroKaran DalalKaran heads supply operations for Media.net and manages some of Media.net’s key publisher partnerships working out of the New York office. As one of the first employees, he has been instrumental in Media.net’s rise in the adtech ecosystem. His role over the last 10+ years has been focused on building and managing partnerships across the ad-tech landscape, nurturing strategic alliances and helping drive product strategy.
Prior to Media.net, Karan was an attorney in the Technology & Media practice of one of India’s premier law firms. He is deeply passionate about how access to quality education can help alleviate global poverty and spent over a year living and teaching in a remote village in India to improve the educational infrastructure for teachers and students.
Karan holds a BS in Computer Science and Mathematics from University of Illinois – Urbana-Champaign and a Bachelor of Laws degree from Mumbai University.
Eric DanetzEric joined Thomson Reuters as Head of Revenue in April of 2020. In this role, Eric has oversight of all revenue lines and is responsible for accelerating growth across the Agency and Consumer businesses. He joined Reuters from AccuWeather, where he was Chief Business Officer, overseeing all global revenue-generating products, services, marketing and business development.
As the Head of Revenue for Reuters, Eric will lead our sales and customer success teams globally while establishing a holistic revenue growth strategy involving the targeting of new market segments, diversifying customers and categories, and identifying cross-selling opportunities across the wider portfolio.
Eric is an exceptional sales executive with an impressive track record in building new revenue streams, attracting new customers and scaling high growth media businesses. He reports into the President of Reuters and sits on the Reuters Executive Committee.
David DanzigerDavid Danziger is the Vice President of Enterprise Partnerships at The Trade Desk, a global demand-side platform in the $5B real-time bidding industry. In his role at The Trade Desk, David leads the company's strategic partnerships for data, targeting, and measurement. His emphasis is creating relationships that increase effectiveness of The Trade Desk clients’ media buys through improved front-end targeting or back-end analytics.
David is an adtech and data industry veteran having previously served as senior director of data solutions at Merkle and director of data products at Acxiom.
David is a graduate of The University of Michigan and The University of Texas.
Mainardo De NardisMainardo de Nardis has been CEO of OMD Worldwide since 2009.
OMD Worldwide is a leading global media communications agency, recognized for its global footprint, strategic integration and creative innovation. It has been acknowledged as Most Creative Media Agency by The Gunn Report for nine consecutive years; Adweek Global Media Agency of the Year for 2008, 2009, 2011, 2013 and 2014; and the 2002, 2005, 2009 and 2011 Media Agency of the Year by Advertising Age.
Prior to joining OMD he was CEO of both Aegis Media and Mediaedge:cia Worldwide. He was a co-founder of one of Italy’s “third wave” ad agencies before moving from advertising to media communications to start Medianetwork, Italy’s first media independent.
Mainardo presided over the Cannes Festival’s Media Lions Jury in 2012 and sits on the Boards of Omnicom Media Group and the Ad Council. He resides in NY and London with his family.
Colleen DeCourcyBrian DiLorenzoMiranda DimopoulosMiranda Dimopoulos is the Regional CEO of the IAB SEA+India, a not-for-profit association that elevates the digital industry locally, regionally and globally.
Under her leadership, the membership has grown more than twelvefold in the last five years. An economist and expert on Asia, Miranda is a sought-after public speaker and commentator internationally on the insights and opportunities to grow investment in this diverse region. She has served as a Singapore Government Board Member for Critical Infocomm Technology since 2016, is an official advisor to the Indonesia, Thailand and India Governments and launched the 2018 partnership with the Economic Development Board (EDB) and Workforce Singapore (WSG) for a 2 year programme developing Programmatic talent.
Miranda was one of Campaign APAC’s 40 under 40 2016, CMO Asia and World Brand Congress Top 50 Leaders in Asia 2016, Campaign APAC Women to Watch (Agents of Change) 2016, the only person from APAC on the The Drum New Years Global Honours List 2017, World Women’s Congress Super Influencer 2017 (Top 10 Global Leaders) and Business Top Leader APAC 2018.
Jerry DischlerJerry Dischler is a Vice President and General Manager at Google, and oversees Google’s Advertising products including search, display, shopping, travel and video advertising, as well as analytics.
A 10+ year Ads veteran, Jerry led Google to move beyond plain text ads to deeper experiences, including the development of Ad Sitelinks and Product Listing Ads. Through various leadership roles on the team, he’s played an important role in defining the future of advertising at Google including leading the transition from desktop to mobile advertising, accelerating direct response advertising on YouTube, and developing new ad products for SMBs.
Prior to his current role, Jerry led the product and engineering teams for ads on Google’s owned and operated properties (Search, YouTube, Maps, Gmail, Discover), buying platforms (Google Ads, Search Ads 360, Display & Video 360), and Google’s home-grown sales and support platform. Earlier in his career at Google, Jerry led Google’s commerce products, including Google Checkout (now Google Pay) and Google Product Search (now Google Shopping).
Before Google, Jerry served as the Director of Engineering at Avolent where he was instrumental in developing the company’s award-winning billing and payment products. He also worked in engineering and leadership roles at Hyperion, Sana Security, and Accenture, where his work focused on enterprise billing, customer care, and security software.
Jerry earned his bachelor’s degree from the University of Chicago and his MBA from The Wharton School of Business.
Michael DorfMichael Dorf serves as Vice President of Revenue Operations at Univision Communications Inc. Michael oversees all of Yield Management, Ad Operations, Programmatic and Advertising Solutions.
Previously, Michael lead the Media Operations team at Freewheel, a Comcast Company and was able to bridge the gaps between Linear, Digital and Programmatic advertising. Prior to that he was at Conde Nast where he led the Ad Operations across Video, Programmatic, Display and Native. He started his career running Revenue Operations for Blip Networks which was eventually acquired by Disney via Maker Studios.
Gilad ElbazGil Elbaz is the Founder and CEO of Factual, a data company that enables developers, publishers and advertisers to build highly relevant mobile experiences using the context of location. Prior to Factual, Gil co-founded Applied Semantics Inc. (ASI), which developed contextual advertising products, including ASI’s AdSense. Google acquired ASI in 2003, where Gil stayed on as the director of engineering, continuing to work on AdSense and other products. In 2008, Gil founded The Common Crawl Foundation, a non-profit with the goal of democratizing access to web information to enable greater innovation in research, business and education. He continues to serve on the board there as well as on the board of the X Prize Foundation. Gil is an active angel investor. He recently co-founded TenOneTen ventures with David Waxman, and his notable investments include Climate Corporation (acquired by Monsanto for $1.2 billion), GoodReads (acquired by Amazon), Scopely, and Kaggle. Gil earned a B.S. with a double major in Engineering & Applied Science and Economics from the California Institute of Technology.
Dennis EllisTom EslingerTom works across Saatchi & Saatchi’s worldwide digital capability and is based in NYC and spends 50% of his time in China as Greater China Chief Digital Officer. He has both a worldwide focus across integrated creative, strategy and operations, adding talent, new capabilities and forging worldwide partnerships with creative partners and platforms. In 2014, Tom added Digital Executive Creative Director to the Asia Pacific/China region to his creative and strategic duties. Tom is a highly awarded digital and mobile creative director, with 69 Cannes Lions across multiple categories and 100s of international awards. Following his Presidency of the Cyber Lions, Tom was the first President of the Mobile Lions in 2012. The Creative Data jury at Cannes 2015 is Tom’s fifth Cannes jury, having served on the 2002 Cyber and 2006 Titanium juries. He is a member of Saatchi & Saatchi’s Worldwide Creative Board and works on the development of the annual New Director’s Showcase at Cannes Lions. Tom’s creative work is part of the permanent design collections of Museum of Modern Art in NYC and the Smithsonian Institute in Washington DC. Naturally Tom’s work has become all things social and mobile. He champions the necessity, tactics, and possibilities of mobile advertising and marketing in his recently published book “Mobile Magic”, where he takes readers step-by-step through his process for creating truly mobile ideas. Tom lives with his partner Gregory and their Lakeland Terrier Berkeley Jackson in the Financial District of Manhattan.
Anne EspinalAnne Espinal joins IAB as an Account Manager for the Member Engagement and Development team focusing on post-sale management. Previously, Anne was with Nielsen on the Client Solutions Team working directly with clients to inform and support Nielsen products for both traditional TV and digital offerings. Prior to that, Anne worked on the Audio team at Univision, managing sold audio sponsorships from inception to execution as well as planning and strategizing media plans. Anne brings her experience in client relationship and project management to execute seamless sponsorships and campaigns for IAB and its members.
Towney FeehanTownsend Feehan is CEO of IAB Europe. Prior to joining IAB Europe, Townsend worked for Microsoft Legal & Corporate Affairs in Brussels and ran EU industry associations in the ICT, consumer electronics and biotechnology sectors. Townsend has an M. Phil. in European policy from the law faculty of the University of Edinburgh.
Konrad FeldmanKonrad Feldman, CEO, co-founded and launched Quantcast in 2006 along with Paul Sutter to transform the effectiveness of online advertising through the use of science and scalable computing. Prior to co-founding Quantcast, Feldman co-founded Searchspace (now Fortent) the leading provider of terrorist financing detection and anti-money laundering software for the world’s financial services industry. As CEO of Searchspace’s North American business, he established the business in the US and directed its rapid growth to become a market leader. Prior to Searchspace, Feldman was a Research Fellow in the Intelligent Systems Laboratory at University College London. Feldman holds a Bachelor of Science in Computer Science from University College, London.
Tony FicarrottaTony is an experienced lawyer specializing in issues affecting digital advertising and media. Most recently, Tony was attorney at ZwillGen, where his practice focused on advising ad-tech platforms, social media companies, and digital publishers on strategy and compliance in connection with privacy requirements. Tony previously served as counsel for the Network Advertising Initiative and worked at an international law firm. Tony holds a J.D. from the Duke University School of Law, and an M.A. in philosophy from Georgetown University.
Kirsten FlanikKirsten is the Managing Director of BBDO New York.â€¨â€¨In addition to her agency responsibilities, Kirsten oversees the Mars business (which includes more than a dozen of the company’s major chocolate, pet and food brands), FedEx, ExxonMobil and the agency’s public service efforts in support of Autism Speaks. â€¨â€¨Since joining BBDO in 2006, Kirsten has been named a “Woman to Watch” as well as one of the “100 Most Influential Women in Advertising” by Ad Age.
â€¨Outside of her day-to-day responsibilities, Kirsten serves on the board of Somerset Hills Learning Institute, one of the premier institutions for children with Autism, is a member of Advertising Women of New York and BBDO’s Women Leadership Council, a group dedicated to helping women succeed in the workplace.â€¨â€¨ Kirsten is a 1989 graduate of the University of Florida. She currently resides in Brooklyn with her husband and their two children.
Tom FochettaTom Fochetta is an experienced business leader and media veteran with more than 20+ years of digital advertising experience. He currently serves as Vice President of Samsung Ads, a leading provider of Advanced TV advertising solutions.
Tom has a proven track record for spearheading high-impact sales teams at world-class media, commerce and hardware companies, including Google and Amazon. As the founding executive of Samsung Ads in 2015, Tom was tasked with establishing its global ad sales platform. Among his responsibilities, he leads the Americas’ ad sales, client solutions, and operations, and oversees the Company’s advertising platform across Samsung’s Smart TV and digital ecosystem.
Tom reports up into Samsung’s Corporate Offices in South Korea and frequently informs Executive Leadership of Market Conditions to seek further investment. Armed with a deep understanding of viewership preferences and Smart TV usage, Samsung Ads is a leader in Advanced TV, bringing innovation to advertising and empowering more efficient and effective media strategies. Under Tom’s leadership, Samsung Ads has achieved significant year-over-year growth over the past five years.
Through acquisitions, technology enhancements and the development of an end- to-end tech stack, Tom has opened up a new world of opportunities for the sales team and their clients. In fact, Tom championed the acquisition of AdGear and was part of the Deal Team from Samsung’s M&A arm to acquire the foundation of a fully owned and operated tech stack.
Today, Samsung Ads works with Fortune 500 advertisers selling and servicing ads natively, across over-the-top (OTT)/Connected TV, display and mobile, leveraging its unique audience platform. Tom is an outspoken advocate for the Advanced TV industry, not only sitting on the IAB’s Board of Directors but actively participating in many other industry associations to help educate the industry on Connected TV and evangelize Samsung Ads’ platform.
Tom holds an MBA and a Bachelor of Science in Marketing and Management from St. Johns University. He lives on Long Island with his wife and two sons.
Carl FremontKurt FuleppKurt Fulepp is the Global Chief Product Officer of AccuWeather. In this key leadership role, Kurt is responsible for the vision, strategy and design for the enterprise-wide product portfolio, as well as brand design, creative services, audience & analytics, business intelligence and mobile app development.
As CPO, Kurt is charged with every element of the AccuWeather product roadmap, from conceptualization to launch and post-launch performance. Drawing on his extensive experience working at the intersection of cutting-edge digital products and premium content, he leads the development of the latest ecosystems of products, leveraging artificial intelligence, big data, and connected and smart devices. His expertise in multiplatform storytelling, product management, content commercialization, and cross-platform brand development shapes how AccuWeather delivers weather information to consumers and enterprises around the world.
Before joining AccuWeather, Kurt served as Vice President and Digital General Manager of News and Business at Time, Inc leading the digital brands of TIME, Money & Fortune. Previously, he was Vice President and Head of Product at AOL, Inc., where he oversaw product management, technology and design of AOL’s core business of AOL.com, as well as a portfolio of lifestyle brands focused on home, food, style, weddings and women’s leadership. Concurrent with his AOL tenure, Kurt also served as General Manager of MAKERS.com, providing end-to-end leadership for this first-of-its-kind multiplatform video destination, which profiled exceptional women and their groundbreaking achievements.
Earlier in his career, Kurt served as Senior Manager, Consumer Marketing for NineMSN (Microsoft’s joint-venture in Australia) covering Bing, MSN and Windows Live (incl. Hotmail, SkyDrive & WebApps), as well as Director of Marketing at Nine Television Network Australia; one of Australia’s largest commercial television networks.
Kurt is also as an adjunct professor in the Master of Science in Publishing – Digital Media program at New York University, teaching a course that examines the various business models in digital media and what it takes to build a successful digital publishing business.
He resides in New York City and based at AccuWeather’s New York office at 7 World Trade Center.
Jackie GarciaJackie has extensive accounting experience in the non-profit sector working alongside the Archdiocese of NY working in customer support, accounts receivable, cash receipts, and treasury functions. Jackie is thrilled about starting her new role at IAB.
Isabelle Garrick-OkoliIsabelle joins IAB as a Salesforce Coordinator. Prior to coming to IAB, Isabelle worked as an engagement manager at a DC consulting firm where she also administered their Salesforce instance. That nurtured an interest in pursuing Salesforce more deliberately as a career path and led her here. In her free time, she likes to make candles, do crosswords and explore new cities. Isabelle looks forward to learning from and working with the team at IAB.
Gina GarrubboGina Garrubbo is President and CEO of National Public Media (NPM), where she is committed to ensuring the continued growth of NPR and the public media system via funding from corporate sponsors. Garrubbo has spent more than 20 years in traditional and digital media growing marketing and sales teams, launching brands and building companies. She was one of the builders of Women.com, one of the first websites for women, and BlogHer, which brought independent voices to millions of readers. Garrubbo built advertising sales teams for Oxygen Media, Discovery Communications and in syndicated television. She is Chair of the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB) Board of Directors. She also sits on the Board of Directors of Tappp (an OTT video service), Glen Highland Farm and the Philanthropic Leadership board of EatREAL.org.
Erik GeislerErik leads the Facebook US & Canada Agency teams based in New York and is part of NA Sales Team. His team’s mission is to advance the value that agencies bring their partners through the “relentless pursuit of progress”! Additionally, Erik is the executive sponsor for the Facebook Reserve video solutions that feature In-Stream videos in Watch. He previously led the Technology and Telecommunication team at Facebook for over four years. Prior to Facebook, Erik has founded several companies under the common theme of “changing the way brands advertise”. In 1994, he was a founding partner at Student Advantage, a college marketing company that is credited with establishing the benefits of Youth and Student marketing. In 2005, as a partner and Chief Strategy Officer at Noise, his digital agency produced the first ever marketing campaign on Facebook for Chase credit card services. Erik lives in Brooklyn with his wife Rachel, daughter Ryan (12) and son Logan (11) and enjoys cooking, golf and snowboarding.
Quentin GeorgeAs Chief Innovation Officer, Quentin George is responsible for the overall growth, development and implementation of Mediabrands’ intelligence capabilities including its incubation practice and the physical and virtual Media Labs. Quentin serves as the key driver of all group activities that address not only the complexities of the digital arena for Mediabrands’ clients, but also educates and informs our clients on the hidden opportunities within the space. Internally, he will continue to transform the Mediabrands culture, creating a toolkit of resources that connects the network with a complete catalog of Mediabrands’ services and platform capabilities, partner solutions and case studies. In addition, Quentin will identify and introduce Mediabrands and IPG leadership to potential technology and content partners that are ideally suited to enable our network and clients to grow.
One of the most tenured leaders in the digital arena, Quentin was appointed Chief Digital Officer, Mediabrands in 2009. He joined the IPG Network in 2007 and was named Global Lead, Digital Media and Strategic Innovation for Universal McCann. Prior to his role at UM, he served as Chief of Corporate Development and Managing Director for Organic, Inc., where he grew the business substantially since joining in October 2004. During his tenure at Organic, he led assignments for clients such as Sprint, 20th Century Fox, Mitsubishi Motors and GeekSquad.
Quentin was SVP of Client Services at Avenue A/Razorfish, where he co-managed the San Francisco and Los Angeles offices and was responsible for driving online-based initiatives for clients such as Sun Microsystems, Oracle, Disney, Cisco Systems and Genentech. Back in 1994, he cofounded Electric Ocean, an internationally renowned interactive marketing agency based in Cape Town, South Africa, where he won one of the first Clios ever awarded for digital work. He’s also a founding member and former cochairman of the Digital Interactive Media Association (DIMA).
Quentin resides and makes wine in San Francisco with his wife and children.
Adam GerberAdam Gerber is Global President, Media, for Essence, a data-driven global agency that is part of WPP’s GroupM. In this role, he oversees media capabilities across all channels. This includes driving the agency’s planning, investment, activation and ad operations disciplines and their intersection with GroupM. Gerber’s priority is to build and scale innovative, cross-channel investment models rooted in data and outcome-based metrics that are tied to clients’ business success. He stepped into this role in 2018 after serving as Essence’s SVP, Investment, North America.
Gerber joined Essence in 2017 after spending six years at ABC/Disney where he departed as SVP, Client Development & Communications. Before ABC, he served as Chief Marketing Officer of Quantcast, where he was and an active industry evangelist for the digitally-oriented audience measurement and targeting company.
Prior to Quantcast, he served as VP, Advertising Product & Strategy, for Boston-based Brightcove, Inc. Previously, he was SVP, Director of Innovation & Strategy for Mediavest Worldwide, and Senior Partner/Director, Media Strategy for The Digital Edge (now Wavemaker).
In earlier roles, Gerber served as VP, Associate Media Director at Ammirati Puris Lintas; Account Manager/Interactive Marketing for America Online and Media Supervisor/Media Planner for both JWT and D’Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles. He began his career as a paralegal at Sidley & Austin in Washington, DC.
Evan GiamancoEvan Giamanco is senior vice president of sales strategy and operations at CNN Digital. In this role, Giamanco is responsible for the development and execution of CNN Digital’s advertising strategy and ad product development efforts. Based in New York, he reports to Christine Cook, senior vice president & chief revenue officer of CNN Digital.
Giamanco plays a key role in creating a holistic sales approach across CNN’s digital business, which includes premium verticals, mobile products, programmatic, emerging businesses and Great Big Story, while also strategizing digital revenue and product development opportunities that are in line with the company’s go-to-market strategies.
Before taking on his current role, Giamanco served as vice president of news content partnerships at Turner Ignite, where he developed innovative advertising solutions and powerful branded content campaigns across the company’s news brands.
Giamanco was previously vice president of business operations at SimpleReach, a company that specializes in providing content creators with measurement and optimization capabilities across digital and social channels. There, he built an operations team from the ground up, while leading campaign management and marketing across the company. Prior to SimpleReach, Giamanco was vice president of Business Insider Studios & ad strategy at Business Insider, and spent over nine years of his career at People.com, where he established his digital background.
Giamanco has a Bachelor of Business Administration in marketing and e-commerce from Fordham University, as well as a Master of Business Administration in marketing and e-commerce from St. John’s University.
WarnerMedia is a leading media and entertainment company that creates and distributes premium and popular content from a diverse array of talented storytellers and journalists to global audiences through its consumer brands including: HBO, HBO Now, HBO Max, Warner Bros., TNT, TBS, truTV, CNN, DC Entertainment, New Line, Cartoon Network, Adult Swim, Turner Classic Movies and others.
Warner Media is part of AT&T Inc. (NYSE:T).
Rajeev GoelRajeev Goel co-founded PubMatic in 2006, based on the belief that publishers are underserved from a technology and services perspective, and set out to build an automation software company focused on publishers. Under his leadership, the company has grown and matured into a major enterprise provider with more than 350 employees and 13 locations around the globe. The high pace of revenue and profit growth is fueled by Rajeev’s commitment to help publishers protect, monetize and manage their most valuable asset – the relationship between consumers, content and brands.
Rajeev is a serial entrepreneur who has raised more than $250 million in funding throughout his career.
Prior to PubMatic, he co-founded Chipshot.com, a leading online retailer of custom-built golf equipment, where he served as vice president of technology. At Chipshot, Rajeev also led product management and development, helping grow the company into a $30 million business. An experienced management consultant, he was also a principal at Diamond Management and Technology Consultants, an IT strategy consulting firm for Fortune 2000 clients, where he led teams on IT strategy engagements. In addition, Rajeev was a product marketing executive at SAP, where he was responsible for global go-to-market strategy for new products.
Rajeev served as a member of the Board of Directors of the Ad Council, a nonprofit organization and the largest producer of national public service campaigns in the U.S. He holds a master’s degree in computer science from the University of Pennsylvania and a bachelor’s degree in economics, political science and Spanish from the Johns Hopkins University.
Alanna GombertAlanna is Head of Advertising Technology at ConsenSys, a blockchain company focused on the adoption of decentralized networks and economies. She is also the CEO of the Digital Asset Trade Association (DATA), an advocacy group formed in Davos in 2018 for Distributed Ledger Technology. DATA helps to shape public policy issues to support the growth of digital assets, digital identity, smart-contracts and digital currencies and worked extensively in Wyoming and Colorado on blockchain and cryptocurrency legislation. Prior to DATA, Alanna was Global CRO at MetaX where she oversaw product creation, strategy, and go-to-market including the adChain and adToken dApps on Ethereum and the first Token Curated Registry on the Ethereum Mainnet. Before she entered the blockchain sphere, Alanna ran global advertising standards General Manager of the IAB Tech Lab. Alanna had senior roles at Accuen/Omnicom Media Group, Condé Nast and at Admeld (acquired by Google) where she helped grow Real Time Bidding from an idea into an advertising industry mainstay.
Jae GoodmanJae Goodman is Chief Creative Officer and Co-Head of CAA Marketing, a division of leading entertainment and sports agency Creative Artists Agency (CAA). Goodman works in the Los Angeles office and helps provide corporate clients with creative solutions that leverage the power of entertainment to build brands and drive business results. CAA Marketing clients include Coca-Cola, General Motors, Diageo, Chipotle, Samsung, Neiman Marcus, Burberry, Keurig, Fender and The MacArthur Foundation, among others.
CAA Marketing was the driving force behind Hasbro’s Transformers film franchise and Chipotle’s “Cultivate” campaign, including the animated short film “Back to the Start” featuring Willie Nelson covering Coldplay and its follow-up “The Scarecrow.” The campaign has won four Cannes Grand Prix awards in four different categories in the past three years.
CAA Marketing is responsible for the first and second brand films ever accepted to the Sundance Film Festival, the first-ever live interactive show on Hulu, nine Webby Awards in six years for four different clients, and eight Emmy nominations and four wins for such clients as Old Navy, Chipotle, and Dolby.
Prior to CAA, Goodman served as Senior Vice President and Executive Creative Director at Publicis & Hal Riney in San Francisco, overseeing all creative talent and work. Previously, he held creative and executive positions at Wieden+Kennedy, Leagas~Delaney, and Ogilvy & Mather.
Under Goodman’s leadership, CAA Marketing’s work has been selected as one of TED’s “10 Ads Worth Spreading,” and in 2014, Goodman was named to both Fast Company’s Most Creative People in Business 1000 and Ad Age’s Creativity 50 List.
Eden GorceyMs. Gorcey overseas product and advertising sales strategy for Condé Nast, where she focuses on turning the company’s unique assets – including data, video, programmatic, and experiential offerings – into buyable solutions that drive results for clients. Eden has held leadership roles in both agency and publisher settings, where her work leading media strategy for brands including P&G, Microsoft and Coca Cola has contributed to her status as an industry-recognized innovator.
Brian GottesmanBrian Gottesman leads monetization product development at Flipboard — the worlds largest curated content platform, with over 140 million users. In this role he oversees all monetization products from strategy to planning and execution. Prior to his time at Flipboard Brian ran product management for Amazon’s Video DSP, driving revenue growth, verification vendor business development, and feature expansion including pre-bid, performance optimization and OTT targeting. Before Amazon Brian was VP of Product at Critical Media where he designed, launched and managed Syndicaster, the first cloud-based video editing and distribution system for TV stations. He began his career at Harvard University, building web platforms for a range of departments and institutes including the Life Sciences Division, the Center for Brain Science and the Nieman Foundation.
Philippe GueltonMeredith GuinessMeredith Green is an experienced analytics professional who loves data-driven storytelling, bringing to life the meaning (the “why”) behind consumer behavior. She has spent the majority of her career agency-side, holding positions across digital planning and analytics and has a strong passion for cross-functional learning. Meredith holds bachelor’s degrees in Psychology and Italian Studies from Emory University and loves to travel, eat (is a big foodie!), and spend time with family and friends.
Jay HabeggerJay Habegger is the co-founder and CEO of ownerIQ. Jay is a pioneer in digital media and advertising having over 20 years experience. He has built The Q from it’s humble beginnings to leading the industry in second party data and as the leading programmatic solution for digital advertisers, retailers and brands. Previously, Jay was the CEO and president of Bitpipe, leading the company through to its sale to TechTarget in 2004 in a $40 million transaction Jay has been a guest speaker at events attended by C-level marketing executives discussing the evolution of digital shopper marketing, retailer monetization, and programmatic advertising. He has also written several bylines for prominent advertising and retail publications such as Ad Age, Internet Retailer, Dealerscope, and TWICE Magazine. In addition, Habegger was acknowledged in The Rayno Report’s 2014 list of Top 11 ad tech visionaries. ownerIQ has been named one of the 50 Fastest Growing Private Companies in Massachusetts by the Boston Business Journal in 2017, as a MITX Award Finalist, in Ad Age’s 2015 B2B Best Awards, Digiday Signal Awards 2015, CIO Review’s 2015 Top 20 Most Promising Retail Technologies and as a Hot Tech to Watch in 2014.
Jeff HagenJeff Hagen is the Group Director of Connections Planning & Investment for The Coca-Cola Company’s USA division. In this role he is responsible for helping build Coca-Cola’s integrated marketing strategy; focusing on building a Brand’s ability to connect with consumers using media, data and technology, and owned touchpoints across a consumer’s daily journey. With 15+ years of experience, Jeff has led both planning & investment teams at Cingular/AT&T Wireless, The Home Depot, and Arby’s. He has also worked at world renowned advertising agencies including BBDO, Initiative and OMD leading media strategy and investment across automotive, consumer packaged goods, financial services and entertainment industry accounts.
Most recently, under his leadership, the Coca-Cola Connections team has been recognized for industry leading work in integrated marketing across video, social, search, outdoor and radio and has received various awards from Effie’s, Media Post, and the Festival of Media.
Jeff lives in Sandy Springs, Georgia with his wife, Leslie, and two daughters. Jeff is an active member of his children’s school, church community and youth sports association.
Rachael HaleyRachael Haley, the Regional Marketing Director for the Americas at Airbnb, she oversees strategy and execution of all regional integrated marketing initiatives across all Airbnb businesses. She leads a team responsible for marketing content development, social media strategy and execution, and connections and media activation.
With more than 13 years in the industry, Rachael leans on her deep expertise in media and marketing strategy, including communication planning, strategic partnership development, buy negotiation, plan execution, and measurement, to build innovative marketing campaigns that disrupt the category while driving business results. Prior to Airbnb, Rachael worked in media planning and buying at a number of agencies including OMD before moving into a marketing strategy role at Netflix where she led US launch campaigns for a number of Netflix Originals including House of Cards and Orange is the New BlackJohn HalleyJohn Halley serves as Chief Operating Officer, Advertising Revenue, and Executive Vice President, Advanced Marketing Solutions (“AMS”) for ViacomCBS. In this role, Halley oversees commercial and business operations for the advertising team across the company’s leading portfolio of broadcast, entertainment, news and sports networks, as well as ViacomCBS’ advertising product suite and go-to-market strategy across its digital, social, and advanced advertising offerings spanning BET, CBS, CBS All Access, Comedy Central, MTV, Nickelodeon and Pluto TV, among others.
Halley is the former Chairman and serves on the Board of Directors of OpenAP, the television industry’s advanced audience platform, whose consortium membership includes ViacomCBS, Fox, NBCUniversal, AMC Networks, The Weather Channel and Univision. He also serves on the Board of Directors of Blockgraph, an industry-operated data and insights platform owned by ViacomCBS, Comcast NBCUniversal and Charter Communications that helps media companies and advertisers securely and transparently collaborate to apply data across TV and premium video inventory.
Halley is the Chairman of the New York Chapter of the March of Dimes, and serves on the Board of Directors of Literacy Inc., a New York-based childhood literacy organization. He holds an MBA from the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania and an Economics degree from Santa Clara University.
Matt HarringtonMatthew Harrington oversees Edelman’s four regions as well as Edelman Berland, the firm’s research arm; human resources; legal; information technology; and conflict management. A 21-year Edelman veteran, Matthew is a specialist in corporate positioning and reputation management. His expertise includes crisis communications, merger and acquisition activity and initial public offerings. Currently, Matthew provides corporate and/or issues management counsel to a range of clients, including, GE, Charles Schwab & Company, Samsung and Starbucks. Matthew is a graduate of Denison University, where he also serves on the Board of Trustees. He is a member of the Public Relations Society of America and is also a board member of the World Food Program USA, the Council of Public Relations Firms and the Classic Stage Company.
Eric HarrisEric Harris is the President & Chief Operating Officer at Cheddar, the leading post-cable network currently broadcasting Cheddar, a business news network, and Cheddar Big News, a fast-paced, young, non-partisan general news and headline news network. Before Cheddar, Eric was Chief Operating Officer at KnowMe, an innovative video and sharing platform.
Prior to that, Eric was BuzzFeed’s Chief Business Operations Officer and was responsible for all business operations and a global team of over 100 rockstars that spanned sales strategy & planning, marketing, research, events, ad product, account management, ad operations, social discovery, client analytics, and project management. Eric started at BuzzFeed as the 6th employee and left the company of over 1,000 employees 7 years later.
Eric has also worked as VP of Product Management at Operative Media, where he helped to build their best of breed Advertising Management platform, and as Director of Operations at Washingtonpost.com after spending several years doing consulting work at Price Waterhouse.
Eric has an MBA from the Tepper School of Business at Carnegie Mellon University and lives with his wife, two children, and labradoodle in Brooklyn.
Todd HenryTodd Henry is a Senior Product Manager with the IAB Tech Lab. He has 15 years of experience in the digital publishing industry working for Weather Underground, The Weather Company, and IBM. With a background in engineering and product management, Todd’s previous companies include Intuit, Brøderbund Software, and Mattel.
Michelle HeviaJeremy HlavacekAs CRO for IBM Watson Advertising, Jeremy Hlavacek is responsible for all global advertising sales efforts including premium direct sales, programmatic sales, agency partnerships and data partnerships. His teams work across Watson Advertising’s portfolio of media, data, and AI-powered technology solutions, which includes The Weather Company’s consumer platforms such as weather.com and The Weather Channel apps. Watson Advertising’s offerings help agencies and marketers improve decision-making and drive value across key facets of the marketing lifecycle – from media planning to targeting and activation to measurement and optimization.
Previously, Hlavacek was SVP, global automated monetization for The Weather Company. In that role, he oversaw all programmatic monetization efforts globally and the data partnerships team, which drives off-property data and inventory partnerships with platforms and other publishers. Hlavacek was promoted from vice president of programmatic, where he was responsible for all domestic programmatic sales efforts, platform relationships and programmatic operations. Under his leadership, the programmatic business grew 500% over a 3 year period to become one of the largest and most sophisticated sell side programmatic businesses in the industry. In 2017, AdExchanger ranked The Weather Company’s programmatic business as #2 in the industry among all publishers in media and broadcasting. Hlavacek joined Weather in early 2013 as vice president of operations and strategic partnerships for the company’s WEATHERfx division, where he oversaw technology partnerships and business operations to support the WEATHERfx business.
Prior to Weather, Hlavacek was vice president of strategy and business operations at Varick Media Management, where he helped to build one of the first programmatic trading desks on the agency side. He was responsible for strategic platform partnerships in the ad tech/real-time bidding ecosystem, as well as the business and financial operations of the company.
Hlavacek’s previous experience includes building out digital marketing and gaming experiences at LEGO Toys, directing advertising strategy and business development at Dotmenu (an online food ordering startup acquired by GrubHub/Seamless), and building out digital experiences for entertainment programming at CBS Television. On the agency side, Jeremy has held senior strategic roles at Ogilvy and Cadient Group, where he advised clients in healthcare, financial services and technology.
Hlavacek holds a master’s degree in business administration from Cornell University, a master’s degree in media and communication from the London School of Economics and Political Science, and a bachelor’s degree from the College of William and Mary.
Jesse HorwitzBorn and raised in New York, Jesse Horwitz has always had a strong grasp of economics and finance. He studied both fields at Columbia University, where he graduated Phi Beta Kappa/Magna Cum Laude. During his time at Columbia, he also developed an interest in Film Studies, although following an internship with Sony Picture’s Television Division, he quickly learned that a life in Hollywood was not for him.
Horwitz ultimately decided to take a different path, and spent a year at Harvard Law School, where he met his husband, Mark Severs and secured an internship with Bridgewater Associates. It was at Bridgewater that Jesse met his future business partner, Benjamin Cogan. Horwitz moved on from Harvard to work full time for Bridgewater and then founded Gadfly, a systematic trading firm with Michael Naber, a colleague from Bridgewater.
Horwitz joined the investment team for Columbia University’s endowment in 2013, where he spent the last few years investing across the alternatives landscape – private equity, venture capital, hedge funds and real estate. During his time at Columbia, he built a strong network across the investor community, including Two River, a life sciences merchant bank that invested in and brought together the round for Hubble.
Now Horwitz is Co-Founder and Co-CEO at Hubble, a direct-to-consumer, subscription contact lens company, where Horwitz focuses his efforts on fundraising, business development and regulation compliance. Since launching in November 2016, Hubble has become one of the fastest growing, direct-to-consumer e-commerce companies in the U.S. Horwitz and Cogan earned a spot on Forbes’ prestigious “30 Under 30” list in 2016 and Hubble recently extended its footprint into Canada, the UK and the Netherlands in the past year.
Travis HoweTravis Howe has joined ESPN as SVP, Platform Ad Sales Strategy & Global Operations. In this new role, Howe will be responsible for establishing the go-to-market strategy for ESPN’s digital advertising business moving forward to enhance the overall ESPN Platform. He will work closely with the sales marketing, product and technology teams and be based in the company’s New York office, reporting to Ed Erhardt, president, global sales & marketing.Said Erhardt, “Travis is an outstanding and creative executive who has the vision to identify, develop and execute our key priorities for the digital sales team. His expertise and thorough understanding of the evolving digital media marketplace will help enhance and drive the entirety of our portfolio.”Howe joins ESPN from Mediaocean, where he served as the executive vice president and general manager of global platform solutions. Throughout his tenure, Howe led the company’s go-to-market, cross-platform strategy, sales and client services supporting digital, cross-media and television ad sales revenue and technology for global media, entertainment and publisher companies.
Prior to Mediaocean, Howe was senior vice president, head of digital ad sales for the Americas at Sony, where he oversaw Sony’s digital entertainment division across Sony Pictures Entertainment, Sony Pictures Television, Sony Music and PlayStation. His previous roles include consulting, operational strategy and change management at Accenture.
Howe currently serves as an executive member of the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB), as well as for The Paley Center. He also serves on the Board of Directors for the Lighthouse Guild and Chairman of the Music School Advisory Board. He graduated from the University of Colorado, Boulder with a double major in finance and international business.
Scott HoweScott Howe is the Chief Executive Officer of LiveRamp (NYSE: RAMP), a software-as-a-service (SaaS) company that provides the identity platform for powering exceptional experiences. LiveRamp is the largest provider of identity resolution services, serving more than 1,000 companies across a broad range of sectors including brands, agencies, technology vendors, data providers, and publishers.From 2011 to Sept. 2018, Howe served as CEO and president of LiveRamp’s former parent company, Acxiom—a technology and services company dedicated to providing the data foundation for the world’s best marketers.
Throughout his tenure, Acxiom won countless industry awards and accolades, including recognition for the industry’s Best Innovation, Partner of the Year by the one of the world’s largest financial services companies and Supplier of the Year by the world’s largest retailer. In 2014, Fast Company named Howe one of the world’s Most Creative People.Before taking the reins at Acxiom in 2011, Howe held executive roles at Microsoft and aQuantive, where his teams built the world’s largest digital agency (Avenue A|Razorfish); pioneered people-based media buying (DRIVE Performance Media, aka the Microsoft Media Network); and developed the systems utilized for ad serving and attribution (Atlas International). He began his career at The Boston Consulting Group and Kidder, Peabody & Company, Inc.
When he’s not helping LiveRamp deploy the world’s most advanced and trusted offline and digital identity resolution technologies, Howe can be found serving as scout master for Troop 28 in Burlingame, Calif., canvassing the country in his refurbished 1956 vintage Airstream trailer or designing and building furniture in his garage workshop. A native of Milwaukee, he is a proud fan and part owner of the Green Bay Packers.Scott graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University with a degree in economics, and earned an MBA from Harvard University. He most recently served on the board of directors of Blue Nile, the largest online retailer of certified diamonds and fine jewelry, and is a former director of the Internet Advertising Bureau (IAB) and Turn, Inc., a digital advertising company.
Larry HuntLarry Hunt leads Video Investment for AT&T at Hearts and Science. Included in his responsibilities are AT&T’s Mobility, Directv and Business to Business Solutions brands in addition to Cricket Wireless.
Prior to joining the Hearts & Science, Larry was Senior Vice President, National Video Investment at Zenith. Over 14 years, Larry’s tenure focused on Verizon Wireless while working across a number of top brands including Sonic Restaurants, Hulu, Hallmark Channel, JP Morgan Chase, Darden Restaurants, and Ubisoft. Prior to Zenith Larry had spent years working at Initiative, True North and Y&R. At those agencies, Larry serviced brands such as Subaru, Jergens, American Airlines, Nortel Networks, US Army, Dr Pepper and Miller Beer.
Larry is a graduate of Baruch College and resides in Cranford, New Jersey with his wife Jennifer, daughter Isabelle and sons Owen and Harrison.
Jia HyunJia Hyun is a global marketing and digital strategy executive with a 20-year record of driving marketing innovation to generate double-digit revenue growth for Fortune 500 firms, including LinkedIn, GE Capital, Citigroup, American Express, and MasterCard International. She is a strategic leader who has created and led digital transformation initiatives, built ecommerce capabilities, and orchestrated integrated marketing teams programs and data strategies across multi-national marketing organizations.
As Vice President, Jia currently leads the sales and client services teams across North America for LinkedIn’s $2B advertising business. Jia holds a Master of Business Administration with a concentration in Marketing and Information Systems from New York University. She lives in New York with her husband and 2 boys. She is an enthusiastic amateur pickle maker and prolific home cook who balances her love of food with adventure, singing, and dancing.
Stu IngisStuart Ingis, Partner at Venable LLP, is nationally recognized as a leading attorney on privacy, marketing, advertising, eCommerce, and Internet law. He co-leads Venable’s privacy practice, which won the Chambers USA Award for Excellence for the top privacy practice and top advertising practice in the United States. He has also been repeatedly listed in the first tier of privacy attorneys in Chambers USA, Legal 500 and ComputerWorld magazine.
Mr. Ingis regularly represents companies in the media, communications, Internet, information services, advertising, and retail industries before the US Congress and the Federal Trade Commission as well as before other federal and state agencies. He defends companies in investigations by the FTC and State Consumer Protection Authorities. He regularly counsels clients on privacy and marketing issues and practices. He conducts internal assessments of company practices and products, and works with companies to design and implement compliance systems and best practices. He has represented CEOs in testimony before Congressional Committees.
Mr. Ingis brings coalitions together and leads self-regulatory efforts in the eCommerce, online, privacy, and data security space. He serves as general and policy counsel to the Direct Marketing Association, Washington advertising and privacy counsel to the Interactive Advertising Bureau, and general and policy counsel to the Digital Advertising Alliance.
Aimee IrwinAimee Irwin serves as VP of Strategy and Partnerships at Experian Marketing Services. Aimee is a skilled strategy and corporate development executive with deep experience in digital marketing and advertising and track record of success in developing and building profitable new digital and mobile businesses at both early stage and public companies. Aimee led strategic partnerships and strategic initiatives for Nielsen’s Marketing Cloud where she negotiated and managed strategic data and identity management partnerships supporting Nielsen’s data targeting and marketing effectiveness businesses. Aimee also served as SVP of Strategy and Partnerships at Verve Mobile, a leading location-based mobile advertising platform. At Verve, Aimee developed and led Verve’s mobile application business and inventory partnerships with hundreds of media companies. Prior to Verve, Aimee was VP of Strategy and Corporate Development at AOL, where she was responsible for strategic planning, mergers and acquisitions, and strategic partnerships for AOL’s advertising businesses. Previously, Aimee held executive positions at several successful internet and mobile companies including: Lightningcast, an Internet video advertising company now part of AOL, Leap Wireless, a large U.S. wireless carrier and Backwire, an internet and mobile marketing company acquired by Leap. Aimee started her career in consulting with KPMG and Bain and Company. Aimee has a BS from Georgetown University and an MBA from Kellogg.
Julie JacobsJulie Jacobs is General Counsel of Yahoo.
Julie has over two decades of experience in the global media technology industry. She is a proven leader who identifies strategic business priorities and effectively executes against them while promoting organizational culture and values and protecting consumer and company interests. In her current role, she led the integration of the Yahoo and AOL Legal Departments following the acquisition of Yahoo and is responsible for all Legal, Regulatory, Privacy and Compliance matters for Verizon Media.
Karyn JohnsonKaryn Johnson, President, US Precision, spearheads programmatic strategy, capabilities and operations across Publicis Media brands. Karyn’s eye for innovation, paired with her depth of experience in the digital, media and ad tech spaces, helps her to lead Publicis Media fearlessly into the future programmatic world on behalf of its clients.
With over 15 years of industry experience, Karyn has led innovative campaigns on strategy, digital and ad tech development teams, continuously expanding her knowledge, qualifications and ambition. In her previous role at Blue 449 as EVP, Managing Director – Digital, Karyn was instrumental in developing strategic relationships with leading media, data and technology companies for the agency. She constantly challenged her clients to think differently, and led Blue 449 client T-Mobile to become one of the most digitally savvy brands in the market.
Andy JohnsonAndy Johnson joined ALC as Chief Data Officer with responsibility for ALC’s data strategy, acquisition and operations. During his 22-year career in the data-driven marketing industry, he has held a variety of marketing, strategic and senior leadership positions with several data services powerhouses. The skills and experience he brings to ALC include managing data strategy to enable data-driven products and advertising solutions that connect data to digital media, creating a unified organization to align all data-owner relationships across platforms, brands and global teams, managing systems process and tools to produce and optimize data assets, and overseeing multi-million-dollar budgets.
Before joining ALC, Andy was most recently SVP of data and audience solutions for Acxiom/LiveRamp. Prior to Acxiom, he spent 16 years at Experian Marketing services in data solutions, acquisition and management roles. He started his data career developing strategic online alliances at Infogroup.
He received his B.S. in business administration/finance from the University of Nebraska-Lincoln. For ten years, he served in the Nebraska National Guard, receiving the Air Force Achievement Medal for distinguished service (three times). He serves on the board for IAB’s Data Center of Excellence and the Board of Advisors for Kammok. Andy is a frequently requested speaker on a broad range of topics at industry roundtables, events and universities.
Norm JohnstonNorm’s career in digital marketing began in 1995 at Modem Media, the agency that placed the first banner ad. He later launched Modem’s first international operation in London, assuming the role of President in 2004. He later joined Mindshare where he eventually became Global Chief Digital Officer, Global Chief Strategy Officer and CEO of FAST, the agency’s search and programmatic specialist division.
In 2018, Norm was named Global CEO of Unruly where he managed a premium video marketplace with 1.2b in worldwide user reach and ten offices around the globe. In 2020, Norm sold the Unruly business to Tremor International, where he is now a non-executive board director.
Norm is currently the Global Head of Advertising Strategy at News Corp, owner of The Times of London and the Wall Street Journal. When it comes to talking about all things digital, Norm’s expertise has been featured by the BBC, MSNBC, Sky News, The Economist, the Financial Times, the New York Times and all major trade publications. His first book, ‘Adaptive Marketing’, was published by Palgrave MacMillan in 2015. He lives in London with his wife and family.
Weyland JungMax KaplanSocial media guy with a craving for the next big thing. When I’m not feverishly scrolling through Twitter, I can be found at the park with my dog, in the cheapest seat at the Knicks game, or burning up at the beach!Matthew KaplanVincent KarachiraDay-to-dayVincent leads the product vision and strategy for Rakuten Marketing, designing the company’s innovative roadmap to keep pace with the swiftly evolving industry. With a team of more than 200 specialists across the business, Vincent oversees Product Operations, Product Management, Product Marketing and Corporate Strategy. Underscoring everything he does is a commitment to making things happen and creating new avenues for growth for both Rakuten Marketing and its clients.
Career historyAn entrepreneur at heart, Vincent has nearly 20 years of experience scaling software businesses through product innovation. Vincent joined Rakuten Marketing as CEO and Founder of Nextperf, the AI-based retargeting business that Rakuten Marketing acquired in 2016. He oversaw the integration of the company’s programmatic assets and laid the foundational platform its Display business is built on today. Prior to NextPerf, Vincent ran IT services and software companies and invested in start-ups across the entertainment, marketing/advertising and retail sectors.
Alma materMIT, Executive Certificate in Management and Leadership, AI, IoT, StrategyInstitute Superieur de Gestion, Master Degree in Business and FinanceFavorite quote“Innovation distinguishes between a leader and a follower” – Steve JobsOf personal noteFather of 3, Vincent has a huge passion for golf.
Anthony KatsurAnthony Katsur is an advertising technology veteran with more than two decades of executive leadership and operational experience at innovative technology companies.
As SVP of Platforms at Nexstar Digital, Anthony is responsible for leading the platform division across Mass², Kixer and Lakana, overseeing the suite of local and national digital marketing products, content monetization solutions and digital services that allow small and mid-sized media publishers and businesses to maximize revenues across every available channel.
He most recently served as President of Sonobi, where he implemented strategy, recruited and led highly effective teams and executed business with leading agencies, brands and media companies. Prior to Sonobi, Anthony held global leadership roles at Rubicon Project, MediaMath, and Maxifier, where he served as CEO. Earlier in his career, he joined DoubleClick via the acquisition of NetGravity and quickly ascended to lead multiple product, operations and engineering divisions.
Anthony is a current Investor and Advisory Board Member of Stackpop and RevCascade, and is a former Advisory Board Member of iSocket (acquired by Rubicon Project).
He is an active participant at industry conferences, speaking about the latest trends in advertising at AdAge’s Brand Summit, Advertising Week, AdMonsters and GABBCON. His thought leadership has been published in AdAge, Adweek, AdExchanger MediaPost, Econsultancy, Digiday and DMN, among others.
Bradley KayBrad is the President/Partner of SS+K â€“ a creative agency with a unique perspective on social engagement. SS+K is partially owned by Creative Artists Agency (CAA).
The firm may be best known as President Obama’s youth marketing agency for its work on both the 2008 and 2012 campaigns, as well as its involvement in the creation and marketing of the yellow wrist band for the Lance Armstrong Foundation.
Since Brad’s return to SS+K 4 years ago, he and his partners have generated year-over-year double-digit growth in revenue and profit and added Fortune 500 clients including GM, Kaplan, Kraft, and Pfizer among others. This momentum was punctuated by a Cannes Gold for Coca-Cola’s Honest Tea and an anointment as Political Agency of the Year by OMMA magazine.
This is Brad’s second tour of duty with the firm. He first joined SS+K in 1994 and stayed through 1998. Since rejoining the firm, Brad’s focus has been on SS+K’s go-to-market strategy, business development, operations, talent acquisition and retention and managing some of the firm’s larger accounts.
Prior to SS+K, Brad was the EVP/Executive Director of Draftcb’s Digital practice and a member of the New York Leadership Team.
Before this, Brad served as the GM and Co-founder of Merkley ID, the Digital and Design unit of Merkley + Partners. Brad also served as Director of Business Development at The Attik, a global digital, design and motion graphics firm working on brands including HBO, MTV and Nike.
Prior to The Attik, he held account management positions at Ogilvy, Cliff Freeman & Partners and Saatchi & Saatchi.
Brad is currently an Agency Advisory Board member to the IAB. He has spoken about the power of social media as a keynote speaker at Brazil’s “Mais” Account Planning Conference and on a panel of independent agencies at the Cannes Festival. He was featured in Departures Magazine as one of the advertising industry’s new Mod Men. He’s been a judge for the Effie’s, led panels for IAB and been a guest columnist for Adweek, MediaPost and The Hub.
Learn more here: http://about.me/bradleykayJames KelmInternet and mobile executive with over twelve years of experience, including general management, product development, business development, business operations, and strategy.
Hee Kyu KimHee Kyu Kim is an SVP, Digital Media lead, within the Customer Investment and Engagement team at Bank of America. Responsibilities include overseeing all paid digital activation across Display and Social channels for every line of business within Bank of America and Merrill.
Hee Kyu joined Bank of America in 2009, as a VP Digital Media overseeing multiple lines of businesses. Previous to joining BofA, she worked 10+ years within various advertising agencies in Boston.
Hee Kyu received her Bachelor of Science in Business Administration at the University of Vermont.
Hee Kyu resides in Boston, MA and is an active member of BIMA/MITX as well as Boston AdClub.
Joyce King-ThomasJoyce King Thomas is Chairman, Chief Creative Officer of McCannXBC, a unit focused on leading MasterCard’s global marketing efforts. She has is one of the originators of MasterCard’s priceless campaign, which runs in 100 countries and has been spoofed by everyone from Ralph Nader to Bart Simpson.
During a two-year hiatus from McCann, Joyce became a partner at Longreads, at twitter fueled social reading site. She also became a board member of the Nurse Family Partnership, a group dedicated to teaching parenting skills to young mothers living in poverty.
She has won numerous awards and served as a judge for Cannes, the One Show and the Clios. Advertising Age named Joyce one of the 100 most influential women in advertising.
Pauline KlimenkoRob KlippelRob Klippel is Senior Vice President of Advertising Products and Strategy at Spectrum Reach, the advertising sales division of Charter Communication. He oversees data platforms including insights strategy and attribution, and is responsible for advanced advertising platforms including streaming, video on demand, and digital and cross-platform addressable products.
Mr. Klippel joined Charter from Comcast where he was Vice President of Advanced Platforms, developing dynamic ad insertion on VOD and addressable platforms and prior to that he was Vice President of New Products, and of Engineering and Operations. He also served in leadership roles in customer care and operations at Adelphia, Relera and Verio. Early in his career Mr. Klippel held management consulting roles at Deloitte and Accenture.
He holds a B.S. in engineering from the University of Illinois, and an MBA in marketing and operations from the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University.
Mark KoperaMark Kopera leads the Moat Analytics Product organization at Oracle Data Cloud. Part of the Oracle Data Cloud, Moat makes brand advertising more effective by delivering software to measure and optimize media against viewability and attention, brand safety, invalid traffic, and quality.
Prior to Moat, Mark held ad tech leadership positions at Rocket Fuel, [x+1], appssavvy, and Digitas. He also advised media, retail and consumer goods companies and investors as a part of OC&C Strategy Consultants. Mark holds Bachelors and Masters degrees from Cornell University’s College of Engineering and lives in New York City.
Craig KostelicCraig Kostelic is chief business officer, revenue at Condé Nast, heading up all advertising sales across the Condé Nast portfolio.
Kostelic most recently served as the chief business officer of The Lifestyle Collection, including The Food Innovation Group (Bon Appétit and Epicurious), Architectural Digest, Condé Nast Traveler and SELF, overseeing all revenue and brand development for the collection of brands.
Previously, Kostelic served as head of revenue and head of digital for The Food Innovation Group. Under his sales and digital leadership, The Food Innovation Group hit record highs in terms of revenue, profitability and digital audience growth. Prior to his role at the Food Innovation Group, Kostelic also served as digital advertising director at Condé Nast Traveler, where he was responsible for all digital revenue streams and oversaw the launch of CNTraveler.com.
Before joining Conde Nast, Kostelic worked at Google where he was responsible for developing and managing national strategic sales for Mobile Display within the automotive vertical. Prior to Google, Craig held numerous sales and marketing roles at Microsoft and Johnson & Johnson.
Katie KulikKatie Kulik is Executive Vice President, Global Digital Sales at ViacomCBS.
Prior to becoming EVP, Global Digital Sales, Kulik was the Global Senior Vice President of Sales and Marketing for CBS Interactive’s Tech, Games, Lifestyle and Business groups. For the renowned brands CNET, GameSpot, Chow, Last.fm and others, Kulik leads global revenue and product marketing and directs agency and client media strategy and implementation. A veteran sales and marketing executive, Kulik is an expert in premium digital media and understands how to connect brands with customers anywhere.
In her role as Global Senior Vice President Kulik directed a worldwide team of more than 100 sales and product-marketing professionals dedicated to building major campaigns for brands across CBSi’s ecosystem of screens, from online to mobile and social platforms. Kulik has designed innovative marketing programs for nearly every major technology and CE brand, as well as major auto, CPG, and retail industries.
Kulik’s other expertise lies in change management, helping sales and marketing teams rapidly adjust to – and embrace – the ever-changing digital landscape and the resulting implications on consumer buying habits.
Prior to joining CBS Interactive she was in ad sales with the Motley Fool.
She earned a bachelors degree in Economics and Psychology from Lake Forest College and lives with her husband and daughters in Tiburon, CA.
Alexandra LamAlexandra Lam has over ten years of experience in a variety of roles within the digital media landscape. She has provided guidance and support to industries ranging from media production to hospitality.
Chris LaSalaWith a decade of experience Chris LaSala is a seasoned veteran in the digital media space. Chris currently heads Google’s mobile publisher business development efforts where he works with established media brands as well as the emerging mobile application developer community. Prior to this role, Chris held roles leading a channel program aimed at delivering Google’s advertising solutions to local business and leading Google’s North American advertising agency strategy.
Prior to joining Google, Chris held the roles of director of business development at Looksmart where he was responsible for developing partnerships for the distribution of LookSmart’s advertising and search solutions, and strategy development consultant at Strategic Decisions Group, where he advised clients in the oil and gas and technology industries on making multi-billion dollar investments. Chris began his career as a public accountant for five years at Coopers & Lybrand. Chris holds a bachelor of science from Boston College and an MBA from Duke University.
Mike LawMike Law is currently Executive Vice President, Managing Director, Video Investment for Dentsu Aegis Network. In this role, Mike oversees TV and Digital video strategy and investments across the agencies clients as well as leading greater convergence internally at the agency and advancing the adoption of new, advanced advertising platforms. Mike oversees more than $4B in annual video spending across many clients including Microsoft, GM, Home Depot, Pfizer, Macy’s, Reckitt Benckiser, MasterCard, Staples, Sony, Dannon, Outback, Disney and Diageo.
Formerly, Mike was Director of Media Strategy and TV Investments for Pfizer where he handled consumer media strategy for their DTC brands as well as managing the portfolios $600MM+ TV and digital video investments. Previously, Mike was a Media Buyer at Carat and Arnold.
Nick LawAs Global Chief Creative Officer, Nick is responsible for the creative vision of R/GA, the New York-based agency for the digital age. He guides teams of visual designers, copywriters and experience designers as they create award-winning work for a many of Fortune 500 companies. He also ensures that R/GA stays true to the company’s unique legacy of collaboration between world-class creative and groundbreaking technology.
Nick’s background is extensive and diverse, spanning multiple marketing disciplines during 20 years at agencies in the United States and abroad. He began his career in branding and corporate identity and design before switching to advertising, and then ultimately, focusing on digital marketing.
Nick has won every major industry awards, including a Titanium Lion and Grand Prix Cyber Lion at Cannes, and a prestigious Black Pencil from D&AD. Three times he has been named in Creativity Magazine’s “Creativity 50”, a list of the world’s most influential creatives.
Edward LeahyEd Leahy is the Senior Director of data sales and solutions for Lotame, a global marketing technology company that through its leading Data Management Platform (DMP), helps publishers, advertisers and agencies navigate the growing challenge around managing audience data. Ed joined Lotame in 2016 to spearhead data solutions sales efforts across North American agencies and trading desks. Prior to joining Lotame, Ed held positions in business development at iBehavior (KBM Group) and Mariah Media Network. He started his advertising career on the agency side of the business, working for WPP’s GroupM in several client facing roles.
Daryl LeeDaryl Lee is the Global CEO of IPG Mediabrands, the media and marketing solutions division of Interpublic Group (NYSE: IPG), made up of the network’s best-in-class global media agencies UM and Initiative, and a portfolio of innovative marketing specialist companies, namely Reprise, Magna, Orion, Rapport, Healix, Mediabrands Content Studio and the IPG Media Lab. In his role, Lee is responsible for the strategic and commercial leadership and performance of the Mediabrands global network.
Lee has held a series of roles with increasing responsibility at IPG. Most recently, he was the global CEO of UM, revolutionizing the agency into an award-winning global powerhouse with a roster of iconic and fast-growing clients. Relentlessly client focused, Lee fostered a culture at UM that believes “Better Science and Better Art delivers Better Outcomes.” His inclusive leadership style fueled UM’s momentum, resulting in countless new and expanded client relationships with globally recognized brands including American Express, BMW, Coca-Cola, Johnson & Johnson, Sony and Spotify.
Lee’s strategic vision positioned UM at the forefront of media transformation, attaining industry leader status on Forrester’s first-ever Wave report on the media agency landscape in 2018. Lee originally joined UM in 2006, as the Head of Global Strategy. During that time, he built the Communications Planning Practice across global clients including Coca-Cola, Johnson & Johnson, MasterCard, Microsoft and Sony. He then joined McCann Worldgroup as Chief Integration Architect, eventually becoming Global Chief Strategy Officer responsible for working across all McCann offices to ensure clients received integrated brand solutions customized to their business challenges. In 2013, Lee returned to UM in the role of Global CEO.
Prior to IPG, Lee spent six years at Ogilvy, where he was Group Director of the Marketing Strategy Group and the 360 Strategy Director for the global IBM account. Lee began his career as a consultant for McKinsey & Company in the New York office.
Lee’s career is driven by his passion for marketing, endless curiosity, respect for the power of storytelling and commitment to positive social change. He is a vocal champion for diversity, equity and inclusion in the world and the workplace. He currently sits on the board of the economic empowerment non-profit STRIVE and is a former board member of the Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation (GLAAD). Daryl is also on the Board of Directors of Effie Worldwide, sits on the Facebook Client Council and Twitter Influence Council and has been a juror for multiple awards including the inaugural Creative Effectiveness Cannes Lions.
Daryl graduated with a D. Phil from the University of Oxford, which he attended as a Rhodes Scholar, and in 2016 was named Executive of the Year by AdWeek and was honored by Advertising Age as a Media Maven for 2015.
Russell LeFevreRich LeFurgyRich LeFurgy has been a board member, advisor or investor in over 55 online advertising companies, drawing from over a 30 year career in advertising. LeFurgy was Founding Chairman of the IAB and sfBIG, a Venture Capitalist (WaldenVC), head of ad sales at Starwave (ESPN.com) and the Walt Disney Internet Group. Prior to Starwave, LeFurgy had a 17 year career at traditional ad agency NWAyer in New York, working on clients AT&T, Proctor & Gamble, Avon, Gillette and Dupont, among others.
He started online advertising business accelerator Archer in 2004, helping early stage online advertising companies reach takeoff velocity with strategic advisory services in fundraising, trade marketing and sales. LeFurgy received ad:tech’s Industry Achievement Award (2008), the IAB’s Lifetime Achievement Award (2004), was inducted into Advertising Age’s Interactive Hall of Fame (2000). He was recognized by USA Today as the “Johnny Appleseed of online advertising”.
LeFurgy has served on company boards as a director, including Blue Lithium and Associated Content (both sold to Yahoo!) and Web Clients (sold to ValueClick), and is currently on the board of Placecast. He has also provided advisory services to large and small online advertising companies (Google, AOL, Blue Lithium, Glam, and Placecast) and has personally invested in a number of promising online advertising startups, such as Klout, Ad Relevance (sold to Nielsen NetRatings), Grouper/Crackle (sold to Sony) and Blue Lithium (sold to Yahoo!), among others.
Tyler LettichTyler joins IAB from Adweek where he served as Director, Programming and Events where he led the event and programming team strategy, including oversight of topic ideation, speaker recruitment, moderator preparation for more than 40+ events. Tyler started his career at Argyle producing 1-day CMO Forums and later moved to the Innovative Enterprise business when the company tripled its size through acquisitions. At Innovation Enterprise, he developed large scale 2-day multi-themed programs for marketing, advertising, and media executives. Tyler has a passion for marketing, advertising, and media. For Tyler, there’s nothing more exciting than pitching a potential speaker and getting the win! He has a passion for creating programs and delivering enticing and relevant content for audiences. Tyler earned his B.A. in Communications and Public Relations from William Paterson University.
Helen LinA catalyst of innovation, a pioneer in programmatic, a collaborative industry partner, and fierce champion for diversity and inclusion, Helen Lin is Chief Digital Officer for Publicis Media.
Helen oversees digital strategy, partnerships, investment and negotiations on behalf of Publicis globally, represents the Groupe in industry-leading initiatives including improving digital brand safety standards and the overall safety on today’s largest consumer platforms. Helen enables our clients including Disney, Verizon, Kellogg’s, Lowes, Coty, GSK, and many others, to remain at the forefront of the rapidly, evolving digital ecosystem.
Helen’s professional focus goes beyond client & agency work. She is the founding Executive Sponsor of Publicis Media’s Women’s Business Resource Group POW! (Power of Women!), and on the board of Asians in ADCOLOR. She is also an active board member for Partnership with Children, a non-profit that helps over 10,000 NYC school children overcome the stresses of growing up in poverty. Helen earned her bachelor’s degree at UCLA and her MBA at NYU Stern.
James LinneyJohn LiskoAdam LowyKris MagelKristian (Kris) Magel serves as President, DAN Media Clients for Dentsu Aegis.
A veteran with nearly two decades of experience in the media business, Kris has proven himself a formidable negotiator who has earned the respect of media partners for both his analytical approach to the marketplace and his passionate representation of clients. His reputation for articulate, informed intelligence also makes him a favorite with the press and a popular panelist at industry events. In 2012 Magel was named to the Adweek 50 (#16) as one of the industry’s most influential executives and was a Mediaweek ‘Media All-Star’ in 2007. Magel also has an influential voice within the video industry, serving as a co-chair of the Ad Council Broadcast TV Committee, a member of the advisory boards of industry collective Videonomics and Advertiser Perceptions and a board member of the New York Advertising Club.
Kris received his Bachelors of Arts degree from the John Wiley School of Business at the State University of New York at Geneseo. He makes his home with his family in New York City and East Hampton, New York.
Jean-Philippe (JP) MaheuJean-Philippe (JP) Maheu is the VP of US Client Services at Twitter, where he leads Twitter’s relationships with its top marketers and manages a team of industry & regional leaders. Prior to this role, JP launched the Global Brands team at Twitter and led the global expansion of Twitter Brand Strategy and Agency Development teams.
Maheu joined Twitter in 2013 through the acquisition of SocialTV analytics company Bluefin Labs, where he was CEO. Under JP’s leadership, Bluefin achieved remarkable sales traction with leading brands and strengthened its market leading position.
Prior to Bluefin Labs, JP served as the Global CEO of Publicis Modem, the digital marketing unit of Publicis Worldwide. Maheu also held positions as both the Chief Digital Officer of Ogilvy & Mather, where he was responsible for digital growth and innovation across the company’s operating units, and CEO of Razorfish, where he led the vision, strategy and growth of the company.
JP holds a MBA from J.L. Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University and a M.S. in Network & Computer Sciences from Pierre et Marie Curie University in Paris, France. He sits on the boards of the IAB, the Mobile Marketing Association, and the NY Chapter of The Nature Conservancy, and lives in NYC with his wife and two children.
Jason MaltbyJason began his career in 1988 buying media for political campaigns. He joined DMB&B in 1989working on accounts such as GM, Kraft general Foods and P&G. Jason joined Ogilvy & Mather in 1993 asAssociate Media Director, working on Hershey, Ryder, Mattel, Duracell, and Sandoz Pharmaceutical(later Novartis Consumer Health Group). He soon rose to Group Director, National Broadcast at Ogilvy,and was named President, Managing Director in 2000 with Mindshare’s launch in the US.
In 2002, Jason was named Media Buyer of the Year by Electronic Media. In 2005, Jason was named aMedia All-Star for National TV/Cable by AdWeek magazine. Jason has also served as Chairperson of the4A’s National Audio/Video committee.
Jason graduated from Gettysburg College (Pennsylvania) with a B.A. in English Literature, and washonored by Gettysburg with the Young Alumni Career Achievement Award in 2003. He lives in Chatham,New Jersey with his wife, Betsy, and their three children, Sean, Megan, and James. He is an avid readerand enjoys fishing, hiking and travel.
Jake MarxRob MasterRob Master is Vice President of Media and Digital Engagement for North America at Unilever. He oversees a team responsible for media innovation, strategy and the development of integrated communication plans for all Unilever brands. Under Rob’s leadership Unilever has been recognized as Digital Marketer of the Year by Advertising Age, Media Client of the Year by Media Post and one of Fast Company’s Most Innovative Marketers.
Rob joined Unilever in 2002 as a brand marketer, managing a number of the company’s iconic brands, including Dove and Axe, and driving award-winning branding campaigns.
Prior to joining Unilever, Rob worked in brand marketing for PepsiCo’s Taco Bell and for various communication agencies, as well as two start-ups.
He holds a B.A. in political science from the University of Wisconsin at Madison and an M.B.A. from the Olin School of Business at Washington University in St. Louis.
Ai MatsubaraMs. Ai Matsubara works closely with Yahoo! JAPAN’s executive management team to optimize business strategy. Prior to becoming a board of director of IAB Tech Lab, over 10 years of Video Ads product development experience with progressively increasing leadership responsibility through Vice President in Yahoo! JAPAN.
Brian MatthewsBrian Matthews leads the national advertising sales team for the NFL Media group. He oversees the ad sales responsibilities for the NFL Network, NFL RedZone and the NFL Digital portfolio.
Prior to joining the NFL, Matthews was the Senior Vice President of national sales for the NBC News Digital Group. He previously served as the Vice President for the NBC Entertainment team delivering innovative advertising solutions across digital properties such as NBC, Bravo, Oxygen, USA and Syfy. Before joining NBC, Matthews led East Coast sales for the BBC America cable network and the BBC digital properties where he helped create the first BBC sales team in the U.S. marketplace. He also spent seven years at Turner Broadcasting representing CNN Digital, and began his sales career at Scripps Interactive.
Matthews is a graduate of St. Bonaventure University and resides in Chatham, New Jersey with his wife and four children.
Mainak MazumdarMainak is a Data Science executive with 20+ years experience in consumer, media, and marketing tech. As the Chief Data and Research Officer of Nielsen Company, Mainak leads the Data Science, Identity Solutions and AI initiatives. He is responsible for developing audience measurement methodologies and product development. Mainak is passionate about scaling businesses with AI, developing talent and delivering results. Prior to Nielsen, Mainak held Data Science leadership roles with GfK, Simulmedia, and Google (DoubleClick).
He completed his masters and doctoral studies from Brown University. Mainak is a member of the General Assembly’s Data Science Standard Board and a steering committee member of the University of Chicago Booth Business School’s Kilts Center of Marketing.
Jodie McAfeeJodie McAfee is Senior Vice President, Sales & Marketing at Inscape, a leading provider of automatic content recognition (ACR) technologies and comprehensive cross-screen metrics for broadcasters and advertisers.
A media and marketing veteran, Jodie has led the strategic execution for advanced video advertising, interactive TV and content acquisition initiatives for more than two decades.
Prior to Inscape, Jodie was General Manager at Samsung AdHub, where he led the development and introduction of Samsung’s multi-screen advertising platform across US and European markets, while overseeing many of Samsung’s partnerships with major agencies and Fortune 500 brands both domestically and internationally.
Previous to Samsung, Jodie was involved in the creation and operation of multiple emerging companies with expertise in connected TV, iTV and advanced advertising. Jodie resides in Brooklyn, is a graduate of The University of Texas and earned a Juris Doctor degree in Entertainment Law from Whittier University.
Ryan McConvilleKirk McDonaldOne of the “50 vital leaders in tech, media and marketing,” according to Adweek, Kirk is the CEO of GroupM North America (NA) where he leads 6,500 people passionate about shaping the next era of media where advertising works better for people. A member of GroupM’s Global Leadership Team, he is a key player in championing GroupM’s strategy to work with agency and GroupM leadership in the region to use its scale in providing more powerful and effective solutions for clients through the development of technology-enabled services.
With $17.6 billion in media investment billings across the U.S. and Canada, GroupM owns a 22% market share in the world’s largest region. Kirk is particularly driven to help GroupM lead the way in driving real change across the industry to find a new balance of making advertising less interruptive and a valued part of the media experience. He also believes that, as the desire for brands to play their part in leading the way toward real change grows stronger, GroupM is the one to help clients be authentic and bold in this moment. Kirk served as the Global CEO of Choreograph, and was responsible for launching WPP’s global data company which brought together over 700 technologists, product developers, and data scientists. Kirk and Choreograph focused on helping marketers and brands realize the value of their first party data in the fast-changing data landscape.
Kirk joined GroupM from WarnerMedia’s Xandr where he most recently served as Chief Business Officer in charge of the go to market functions including sales, communications, product marketing, and marketing strategy and execution after holding the role of Chief Marketing Officer for nearly two years. Prior to AT&T, Kirk was President of PubMatic, the marketing automation software company, and held roles with Time Inc., Fortune|Money Group and CNET Networks, among others.
Throughout his career, Kirk received many accolades including being named to Ebony Magazine’s Power 100 list in 2018, Adweek’s 2014 “12 Stars of Ad Tech Who are Building the Future of the Industry Right Now’ list and Business Insider’s 2014 “The 46 Most Important African-Americans in Technology” list, among others. Kirk is a founding member of the Black Executive CMO Alliance (BECA). He currently serves on the Board of Directors for Elanco (NYSE: ELAN), and is a member of the prestigious Executive Leadership Council. Healso serves on several other professional and not-for-profit boards including the Ad Council, Advertising Week Advisory Council, and is the co-chair of MOUSE/CI.
Kevin McGurnKevin McGurn is Vevo’s Chief Sales Officer. He joins Vevo from Fullscreen, where he served as Head of Sales for the company as well as Otter Media properties including Crunchyroll, Roster Teeth SoompiTV and VRV. Prior to Fullscreen, Kevin was Chief Revenue Officer of Shazam. He previously served as Senior Vice President of Sales at Hulu for nearly seven years, where he grew the sales team from zero to half a billion dollars in advertising revenue. Kevin has also held prior senior roles at NBC Universal and DoubleClick.
Adam McKinneyAdam is SVP – Associate General Counsel for Xandr where he provides legal guidance on technology, product, data, and privacy issues. In his current role, he advises Xandr on the responsible collection and use of data to make advertising matter. Prior to joining Xandr, AT&T’s advertising company, in 2018, Adam was the lead attorney at AT&T for privacy and data protection issues, as well as AT&T’s data analytics unit. Over a 20 year career at AT&T, he has held a wide variety of roles at AT&T, many of them focused on product and data issues. He has a BBA in Management Science from Southern Methodist University and his JD from Baylor University. He offices in New York City.
Noel McMichaelNoel McMichael is Vice President for Strategic Initiatives and Public Sector at LiveRamp (NYSE: RAMP), the leading connectivity platform for the safe and effective use of data.
Responsible for delivering growth in new market verticals that are making investments in identity resolution strategy, he also oversees strategy for public policy initiatives and helps to ensure LiveRamp solutions are interoperable and compliant with evolving industry regulations and privacy laws. An innovator and product evangelist for over 20 years, McMichael has had an illustrious career in the digital marketing industry, having worked with hundreds of the world’s leading brands and startups to bridge the gap between technology and business.
Before joining LiveRamp, McMichael was Vice President of Product at Acxiom, a leader in identity and customer data management, where he played an instrumental role in the company’s acquisition of LiveRamp and soon after, the formation of the Advertising ID Consortium. His extensive industry experience also includes founding two startups – real-time analytics and demand-side platform Adgile and SEO/SEM company Marketleap. He was also a part of the leadership team at Right Media, the world’s first ad exchange and a pioneer of programmatic media. McMichael has been awarded two patents over the course of his professional tenure, most recently for developing a method to analyze website visitors using anonymized behavioral prediction models.
Throughout his expansive career, McMichael has maintained a passion for mentorship. He currently sits on the board of the IAB Data Center of Excellence and Advertising ID Consortium and was a co-founding board member of the Search Engine Marketers Professional Organization (SEMPO). He holds a bachelor’s degree in political science and international studies from the University of Texas at Arlington.
Maggie MeadeMaggie co-founded Sibling Rivalry in 2011 with partners Joe Wright and Mikon van Gastel. Creating a hybrid company that at its core is based in design and storytelling for brands and networks. Maggie oversees all the sales and operations of the company.
Maggie comes from a career as an Executive Producer from awarded companies such as @radical media and Droga5. While at Droga5, she produced and branded various award-winning multimedia projects, including the “Tap Project,” where she won the first Titanium Lion at the Cannes International Advertising Festival.
Maggie rarely has down time and prefers to have a full social calendar at all times, as people give her energy. She resides in downtown NYC with her husband and daughter.
David MooreNigel MorrisNigel Morris was appointed CEO of Aegis Media Americas in 2011 having held the position of CEO, Aegis Media North America from May 2009. In June 2012 Nigel was additionally appointed CEO of Aegis Media EMEA. From 2003 until 2009, Nigel was the founder CEO of Isobar, and led its rapid expansion into the world’s leading digital services agency network. Prior to this Nigel held a range of senior positions in Carat International. He joined Aegis Media in 1992 having previously worked in fashion, corporate identity and branding consultancy. Nigel is also Chairman of the Aegis Group plc Sustainability Committee and leads the future product offering and service delivery strategy for Aegis Media.
Alan MossAlan Moss is Vice President, Global Advertising Sales at Amazon. His efforts are focused on helping businesses around the world engage customers and build their brands.
Prior to Amazon, Alan spent 13 years at Google, where he most recently served as Vice President of Professional Services supporting advertisers and publishers globally. Other roles included leading Google’s largest U.S. customer sales sector, as well as its Americas mid-market sales organization.
Alan has also held leadership positions at other technology and internet-based companies, including PayPal, ChartOne, Inc., GoTo Shopping (acquired by Yahoo!), CareTools, Wang Laboratories, Microsoft, and LEK Consulting.
Alan earned a bachelor’s degree from Dartmouth College and an MBA from Harvard Business School. He lives in the Bay Area with his wife, Kirsten, and their son and two daughters.
Matt MurphyMatt Murphy is partner and Group Creative Director at 72andSunny, where he helps lead the company’s commitment to experimentation with art, technology, and entertainment.
During his five and half years at 72andSunny, he’s worked across many brands, including the iconic collaboration between K-Swiss and Kenny Powers of HBO’s “Eastbound and Down” to create “Kenny Powers, MFCEO” as well as creating the fully integrated launch campaign for Call of Duty: Black Ops 2.
He currently leads the creative charge on all things Google, including the relaunch of the Google’s Search App which invited New Yorkers to rediscover their city through bespoke OOH placements all throughout the city; YouTube’s Proud to Play film, which celebrated equality in sports during the World Cup; and the recent Made With Code: Holiday Lights project, which gave Google’s initiative to get teenage girls into coding a national stage at the White House Christmas Tree Lighting Ceremony.
Prior to 72andSunny, Matt spent three years at Wieden+Kennedy in Portland working on Nike and EA.
John MuszynskiA 30-plus year veteran and legend in the media world, John Muszynski is the Chief Investment Officer at Spark, and leads all negotiating on behalf of our client’s brands in order to deliver media savings and the best pricing in the marketplace. Not only does John oversee the buying team for Spark, he also leads the Starcom MediaVest Group Exchange (which we call SMGx). John’s SMGx team helps our entire network drive innovation in advanced media and technology while gathering marketplace intelligence across SMG’s $16 Billion in media spending.
Prior to joining Spark and SMGx, John served as CEO of Starcom USA (2005 – 2009), helping build a company at the forefront of leveraging media partnerships to strengthen the brands of some of the world’s biggest marketers. Under his leadership, Starcom was named Ad Age Agency of the Year (2006-07), Media magazine Media Agency of the Year (2005-07) – and was the first media agency to ever make Ad Age’s A List (2007).
John has received numerous honors for his work in the industry, including Advertising Age’s Media Maven, TV Week’s Buyer of the Year as well as a Mediaweek All-Star, min’s Most Intriguing People in Media and Kidscreen Golden Marble Award for Best Media Director. Most recently, John was inducted into the Broadcasting & Cable Hall of Fame, securing his status as an industry icon.
Kunal NagpalKunal Nagpal serves as the GM – Publisher Platforms for InMobi driving both revenue and product strategy for InMobi’s publishing business and premium media exchange. Before that, Kunal was Vice President of Client Services at InMobi, where he oversaw account management for thousands of advertiser clients. Prior to InMobi, Kunal spent a number of years at McKinsey and Co., where he worked with Fortune 500 clients on cross-regional board-level strategy, operations and risk discussions for the U.S., Europe and Australia regionsHannah NardoneHannah joined the IAB in November of 2018. She serves as a Member Services Manager with a focus in post-sales. Hannah is an alumna of Villanova University and holds a Bachelor’s degree in Economics and Classical Studies.
Peter NaylorPeter Naylor is Vice President of Americas at Snap, responsible for driving the growth of the company’s advertising business across the United States, Canada and Mexico. Previously, Peter served as SVP and Head of Advertising Sales at Hulu, where he worked for over six years. Prior to Hulu, Peter was EVP of Digital Media Sales for NBCUniversal (NBCU) where he ran digital advertising sales for NBCU’s entertainment, news and sports digital properties. Before NBCU, Peter served as the SVP of Sales for the iVillage Properties, which was acquired by NBCU in May 2006. Prior to joining iVillage, he served as Vice President of Sales for Terra Lycos. He started his internet sales career at Wired Digital. He serves on the Board of Directors for the IAB, the IRTS Foundation and the TD Foundation, an not-for-profit organization that provides aid to children of wounded warriors.
Goksu Nebol-PerlmanDiana NegronKristoffer NelsonKristoffer Nelson is the COO and Director of SRAX and principal for BIGtoken. As a founding team member, Kristoffer has been pivotal in growing SRAX into a multinational digital marketing and data management platform company listed on Nasdaq.
With over 15 years of technology and creative business experience, Kristoffer has been a guest speaker for Loyola Marymount University among other academic institutions, the National Association of Broadcasters, the IAB and numerous other professional and media organizations. Kristoffer is also a frequent contributor to many publications in advertising, blockchain, and crypto news and information.
Derek NicolJohn NittiJohn Nitti joined Zenith in 2009. His goal was to build ZenithInteractive, the full-service digital media arm of the agency, from the ground up. In less than a year, John brought in more than 50 new hires and 10 new clients—increasing digital billings from $3MM to $180MM.
Since then, John’s leadership has continued to change and grow the agency. In 2010 the Digital and Magazine divisions were merged to offer clients a more robust, content-centric approach to media. Two years later, John was promoted to the newly created position of President of Activation, where he was charged with trading, investment, execution, and activation for all Zenith craftskills. In that capacity, John formed the National Video group in 2012 to bring together linear, digital, and mobile video. The latest implementation, in 2013, was the full integration of all aspects of Local Activation (Broadcast, Print, OOH, and Digital).
That same year also saw the creation of the Activation Standards, Insights and Technology group to complete John’s reimagining of Zenith Activation. With the creation of this group, Zenith is now structured to implement buying standards and strategic partnerships and technology platforms that apply to all genres of media and across all of its clients. This group, driven by John’s vision, helps continue to put Zenith in an industry leading position of driving the marketplace for fluidity and ensures Zenith is a respected leader in the measurement, programmatic and technology space.
John’s vision for the Zenith Activation group has brought about tremendous impact for the agency. His Activation Team now includes over 300 staff members across North America and manages clients’ media investments of over $10B (2013). John is the architect of Zenith’s fluid video approach for reaching consumers across multiple screens. He has also been a guiding force in the creation of strategic partnerships that drive cross-platform innovation and measurement.
Fueled by a drive for innovation and a desire to evolve the media marketplace, John was promoted to Chief Investment Officer of Zenith in September of 2014. In this position, John will continue his oversight of the Zenith Activation teams while adding many key initiatives for Publics Groupe and the ZO Agency Network (Zenith, Optimedia, Moxie and Performics) to his remit.
Prior to joining Zenith, John was Director of U.S. Media & Sponsorships at American Express for six years, where he was responsible for developing and overseeing traditional and digital media planning and strategy efforts across various business areas for the company.
In addition to his work at Zenith and American Express, John has held posts at Young & Rubicam, Time Inc. and Dentsu. He has over 16 years of experience in media planning, buying, and sales.
John holds a Bachelor of Science in marketing and finance from Wagner College. He resides on Staten Island, New York, with his wife Noelle and their two sons.
Kim NorrisKim Norris is a senior cable advertising and media executive with over 20 years of experience in general management leading sales, strategy and new ad technology products and data solutions for multiple cable operators. As Group Vice President, Digital & Advanced Advertising Sales, Kim is responsible for leading the sales teams in the Northeast and a robust enterprise wide digital business. An industry thought leader and innovator; Norris has established a record of success running both traditional media sales and incubating and deploying transformative new advertising products at the convergence of media, technology and data.
Prior to Joining Spectrum Reach, Norris was Chief Operating Officer for Viamedia and worked with the company’s 60 MVPD partners across the US on both traditional and OTT and mobile streaming and programmatic advertising monetization with local, regional and national advertisers in 70 DMA’s across the country. While at Viamedia, she successfully launched an addressable platform with Google Fiber in Kansas City and led the company’s programmatic TV platform placemedia.
Previously, Norris held senior sales and product roles at both Comcast and Cablevision. As EVP of Emerging Business & Data Analytics at Cablevision, Norris drove the advanced advertising product roadmap and commercial strategy for set top box data and addressable and interactive television advertising that established Cablevision as an advertising industry leader and innovator. At Comcast she was a Division Vice President for the Northeast television markets following Comcast’s acquisition of ATT Cable. Norris also served as the founding President of the DPAA (Digital Place-based Advertising Association) in the digital out-of-home advertising industry.
Norris has served on advisory committees for television and digital industry groups and several technology companies. Multichannel News and Women in Cable Telecommunications (WICT) named her a “Wonder Woman” in 2013. She is a Cynopsis 2016 ‘Top Women in Digital” and has been recognized by Cablefax as a “Top Woman in Cabletech” 2011-2016 and is a WICT Betsey Magness Fellow. In 2010, she received the “Most Significant Product or Platform” award from ITVT for leadership in interactive and multiplatform television.
Janet NorthenJanet was one of the first to apply strategic corporate communications to build agency brands. She was The Martin Agency’s first director of agency communications and held the same post later at Fallon and again in 1999 when she joined McKinney. Her work has earned international media for the agency’s talked-about work in the marketplace. In 2009, Janet inspired the formation of the Interactive Advertising Bureau’s Agency Advisory Board that serves as the voice of creativity to its publisher members. She has chaired the 4A’s Agency Communications Committee and is on the board of the UNC School of Journalism and Mass Communication.
Dale OlderDale has served as the Chief Product Officer for Integral Ad Science since 2018, bringing 20 years of product and technology experience to the role. As head of product, Dale sets the strategic direction and roadmap for IAS’ market-leading suite of measurement, verification, and optimization solutions.
Dale has held a variety of roles in engineering, corporate development, and product. Dale joined Integral from AOL Advertising where he was VP of audience data products. Prior to that, he led product development and M&A for AOL’s mobile advertising business. Dale spent his early career in consulting as an engineer for CGI Group, followed by Discovery Communications where he managed programs to transform Discovery’s digital media and advertising technology.
Dale holds a BS in Information Systems from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
Michael PalmerMichael Palmer is originally from a small town in upstate New York. As an undergraduate at Vassar College he majored in history and political science and holds advanced degrees from Cornell, Harvard and the Stern School of Business. Prior to settling into a career in software development, Michael had previously worked a wide variety of jobs, including being a college lecturer, a wilderness guide and a factory shift manager. After working for several years as a software product manager for a clinical trial software, Michael helped found a small business intelligence company, where he ran operations. After selling and successfully exiting this company, Michael joined GroupM via Xaxis where he has worked for the last five years in several technology-related roles. He is currently GroupM’s global Vice President for Emerging Technologies.
Nicolle PangisAs Ampersand CEO, Nicolle Pangis and her team are working to build a smarter, more effective television ecosystem by empowering brands to seamlessly connect with audiences wherever and whenever they watch TV. Pangis previously served as Global COO at GroupM’s [m]PLATFORM where she led global product management, strategic partnerships and technology development across the largest media investment management organization in the world. Prior to [m]PLATFORM, Pangis was a central figure in the success of pioneering programmatic advertising company, Xaxis, serving first as Global Chief Revenue Officer, followed by Global COO. Earlier, she was President of 24/7 Real Media where she led the company’s business in North America and Europe. Nicolle is a member of the Ad Council Board of Directors and has been named to the Adweek 50 list, AdAge’s 40 Under 40, Crain’s 40 Under 40, and Multichannel News’ Women to Watch. She was recently awarded AdExchanger’s 2020 Leadership in Advertising award. She received her bachelor’s degree in communication from Boston University and her MBA from Rutgers University.
Todd ParsonsTodd Parsons is the Chief Product Officer at OpenX, where he leads a global team and is responsible for planning, implementation and go-to-market strategy across the company’s entire portfolio of products including display, mobile app and video. In his position, Todd focuses on creating advertising products at the intersection of consumer identity and data, and positioning OpenX to build programmatic solutions that allow publishers and brands to capitalize on the massive shifts in consumer behavior, regulation, and advertising itself.
Prior to OpenX, Todd was responsible for leading all product at SocialCode, across social, mobile, video and more. Todd also previously worked at Acxiom, leading product for the company’s core $330 million Marketing Services business, and founded two venture-backed startups; Aditive, acquired by Acxiom in 2014, and BuzzLogic, the first Saas platform for social media analytics and advertising.
John PatroulisJohn’s career began as a copywriter in New York City at TBWA\Chiat\Day, NY, where he created campaigns for a diverse roster of clients, including Nextel, Absolut, Samsonite, and Bic. With efforts that included multiple awardwinning television campaigns, and such nontraditional work as a limited edition fashion collector’s piece for Absolut and a billboard that blistered and faded for the Skin Cancer Foundation, his work received some of the highest creative honors in the industry.
In 2004, John moved west and joined the TBWA/Chiat/Day office in San Francisco and went on to lead award winning campaigns for another large variety of clients, including, most notably, adidas, Fox Sports Net, and Motorola. With more high profile, gold pencil and lion winning campaigns including the first ‘viral’ video to receive top honors by the AICP John helped TBWA/Chiat/Day SF become one the most awarded offices in the world.
In 2007, he left to help launch T.A.G. SF. As global creative lead on Xbox, his first year resulted in the Halo 3 “Believe” campaign. With it’s unique approach to integrated storytelling, it became the most creatively awarded campaign of the decade, garnering top honors at every major international award shows including the Integrated Titanium Grand Prix and Film Grand Prix at Cannes, Best in Show at the One Show, Grandy, Grand Clio, Grand Effie, the Art Director’s Club, Addy’s, D&AD, AICP, and more. Once released, Halo 3 become the biggest launch in entertainment history. This and other content driven successes led John to cofound agency two fifteen in 2010 in San Francisco, where he served as ECD/Partner. With it’s continued award winning global Xbox success joined by the social media driven content launch of the Kin phone among other campaigns, agency two fifteen celebrated it’s first birthday by being named to Creativity’s “Alist”, placing it among the 10 most creative agencies in the world.
In summer of 2011, John accepted the role of Chief Creative Officer at BBH New York. One year later the agency was named to Creativity’s “AList” for the first time in it’s history. With integrated campaigns for clients like Playstation, Axe, Google and Cole Haan it has grown to become one of the most awarded agencies in NYC, and was recently named one of Creativity’s “Innovators of the Year” in 2014, “One to Watch” by Adage, and was the only agency in North America to win Gold Cannes lions in both the Film and Cyber categories at the 2014 festival. For this and other efforts, John was recently named one of the “Adweek 50”, the annual list of the top 50 innovators and influencers in marketing. And in January of 2015, he was named BBH’s first ever Creative Chairman in New York.
Over his career John has received every single top international creative honor several times over, including the One Show Best in Show, Grand Clio, The Grandy, and the Cannes Grand Prix, which he has won twice.
Catherine PattersonCatherine Patterson serves as Director of Experiences and branded content, for VMLY&R North America, where she leads teams in identifying, architecting and developing branded content platforms and experiences for all clients, with a focus on the crossroads of culture and technology.
Her work has received highest honors worldwide with multi-channel multi-year wins at the Cannes Festival of Creativity, the One Show, D&AD, the Webby Awards, FastCo Innovation SXSW, and others. During her tenure at Y&R, Catherine established best practices, trained creative, tech and production units in strategic and integrated production, and delivered multi-million-dollar programs for clients in the consumer packaged goods, tech, not-for-profit and social cause spaces. She’s masterminded strategic partnerships with the New York International Children’s Film Festival, the 92 Street Y, and is working on an initiative designed to reboot historical exploration with partners including the Explorers Club and others. She’s recognized as an industry leader, a positive force for good, and was voted one of Adweek’s top branded-content creators.
Daniel PhelanEric PicardEric Picard is an advertising technology expert with more than 20 years of experience in the ad technology industry. Eric is currently Vice President of Advertising Product Management at Pandora Media. Previously Eric led product strategy for the DSP business at MediaMath, which acquired his startup Rare Crowds in 2014. Rare Crowds built micro-segmentation technology for finding valuable highly targeted audiences, at scale, and was a spin-out from TRAFFIQ, where Eric was the Chief Product Officer.
Previous to this, Eric was at Microsoft for six years, where he had a variety of roles in technology strategy. He helped set the company’s long-term vision for advertising technology, emerging media product planning, planning for incubation & research teams, and designed next generation advertising products. Eric managed advertising technology acquisition planning from 2005 through 2007 – including reviewing hundreds of deals, and participating on deal teams for numerous pivotal acquisitions, such as Massive, Screen Tonic, adECN, aQuantive and others.
Eric started working in ad technology as founder and director of product management at Bluestreak from 1997 to 2004, where he oversaw advertising products, such as third-party ad serving, ad analytics, rich media products and led development of many company technologies. A frequent speaker across the industry, Eric has written about advertising technology since 1999.
Joe PinskyJoe Pinsky is the head of product development of OTT solutions for Amazon Advertising. His team of product managers and software developers focuses on building products that enable our customers, advertisers, and publishers to grow their businesses. His team looks across products, content, creative formats, supply, and measurement to take a holistic view of digital video advertising. In 2019, Joe was instrumental in the launch of IMDb TV which unlocked unique ad-supported OTT reach. His team also enabled viewers worldwide to watch Thursday Night Football on Amazon Prime Video and Twitch. Additionally, products like genre blocking and video creative builder help build interactivity for OTT ads and give advertisers more control. In working closely with Amazon Publisher Services, Joe has built header bidder solutions for advertisers and helped to connect publishers to new advertising demand. We are excited to have Joe serve as a board member on the IAB’s Video Center of Excellence and be an active participant in critical conversations that are shaping customer experiences and the advertising industry at large. Prior to joining Amazon, Joe worked as a consultant at The Boston Consulting group in Chicago. Joe holds a Bachelor’s degree from Kansas State University and an MBA from Michigan University’s Ross School of Business. Joe lives in Seattle with his one daughter and two sons.
Gruia Pitigoi-AronGruia Pitigoi-Aron is the Vice President of Product for The Trade Desk. In this role, Gruia oversees the teams responsible for all product management, user experience, and enterprise solutions. These teams work closely with all internal business teams, engineering, clients, and partners as they strive to ship the right product at the right time with global impact and scale.
Prior to joining The Trade Desk, Gruia spent 10 years at Microsoft as a Product Manager in various capacities, working on Outlook.com/Hotmail, Windows Live Agents, and BizTalk Server. The general focus was always on core parts of the systems, with the largest amount of time spent scaling and managing Hotmail’s ever increasing storage infrastructure.
Gruia received his M.S. in Computer Science from the University of California, Los Angeles, and his bachelor’s degree in Computer Science for the University of California, Berkeley. He is based in The Trade Desk’s offices in San Jose, CA.
Krishna PoolaStephanie PragerStephanie is responsible for Twitter’s advertising business running through Agencies, Ads API, and Sales Partners, globally. Her team equips these partners with creative solutions to scale and deliver business outcomes for their portfolio of clients.
Prior to joining Twitter in 2013, Stephanie was a Managing Partner at MEC, where she led the Digital Practice. Earlier, as Vice President at MediaVest USA, she was responsible for overseeing research, development, and execution of digital media strategy for her clients.
Ms. Prager was named a 2020 “Female Frontier” honoree by Campaign US and was honored as one of Advertising Age’s “Women to Watch” in 2018.
She resides in New York City, holds a degree from Lehigh University, and is a proud wife and mother of two. She is @stephanieprager on Twitter.
Jay PrasadJay Prasad is Chief Strategy Officer for LiveRamp.
Mr. Prasad has led VideoAmp’s agency, broadcaster and data partnerships that were instrumental in developing new products such as ATV Ignite and it’s partnerships with Mediaocean, Comscore, and FreeWheel. Notably, Mr. Prasad is a co-inventor on VideoAmp’s patents.
Prior to joining VideoAmp, Mr. Prasad served as VP of Global Business Development at TubeMogul where he led the company’s launch of Programmatic TV, data and supply partnerships, as well as their international partnership teams in the U.S., EU, Japan, and Southeast Asia. Previously, he led strategic development at FreeWheel focused on broadcaster’s distribution to digital and OTT platforms. Jay has also held leadership roles w Yahoo!, and Ernst & Young.
Mr. Prasad holds a degree in Marketing, International Business, and Risk Management from the University of Wisconsin-Madison, and studied International Business and International Political Economics at the London Business School.
Ali RanaAs the Global Head of Snap Inc’s Measurement and Insight teams, Ali’s leads Snap Inc’s measurement strategy and the resulting execution across Snapchat’s advertiser clients. Ali’s group is responsible for providing solutions and strategic guidance to advertisers on how to measure and optimize the online and offline impact of Snapchat advertising. Prior to joining Snapchat, Ali spent 16 years at Kantar Millward Brown, more recently as the company’s Chief Digital Strategist. While at Millward Brown, Ali built a number of pioneering measurement solutions across leading platforms and advertisers.
Ali is based out of Snap Inc’s Santa Monica office in Los Angeles.
Chris RecordShenan ReedAdvertising Executive, digital media entrepreneur and public speaker, Shenan is a highly sought-after thought leader, regularly presenting at major advertising and digital media industry conferences. Her insights and opinions have been cited in The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, AdAge, MediaPost, Huffington Post, AdWeek and Women’s Wear Daily. Her deep understanding of advertising, media and analytics has mandated her inclusion on several advisory boards including Pinterest, AdLedger, Namely, Teads and Style Coalition.
Michael ReidyIn his current role, Mike oversees the digital sales for the NBCU Entertainment Vertical (NBC, USA & Syfy) with a focus on digital video and Strategic Partnerships: YouTube, Snapchat and Buzzfeed.
In his 11 year career with NBCU, Mike has held several leadership roles, most recently leading a converged team of both digital and television sellers. Mike gained acceptance into NBCU via the GE Experienced Commercial Leadership Program (ECLP); a 2-year program known for the development of Marketing and Sales Executives through Six Sigma training.
He received his BA from Southern Methodist University in Dallas, Texas, (focusing on Advertising and Theater), and his MBA from Thunderbird, the International School of Business (focusing on Marketing and Chinese).
Matthew Renne’Matthew Renne joins the Learning & Development team as an Account Director. Prior to joining the IAB, Matthew was with TBWA Worldwide where he led global partner relationships & regional precision marketing growth for Nissan. Matthew brings an energetic and detailed process driven approach to his work, which he looks forward to bringing to the L&D team. Outside the office, Matthew spends his time playing volleyball, baking, and biking.
Neal RichterWith 20 years of software experience, Neal is focused on optimizing business needs, leading tech teams to create relevant and effective data-driven products that build the bottom line and deliver client value. Prior to entering advertising technology, Neal worked at RightNow Technologies, an early CRM vendor that sold to Oracle in 2011. There Neal led a team of AI/ML engineers that pioneered the use of sentiment analysis, natural language processing and content search systems in over 36 languages within automated customer service systems. Neal currently serves as co-Chair of the OpenRTB protocol that standardized the process of RTB, the Deal-ID and the Native ads format and the new Ads.txt standard.
Joy RobinsJoy Robins is Chief Revenue Officer at The Washington Post. Robins joined The Post after five and a half years at Quartz, most recently serving as Global Chief Revenue Officer. There she led the company to triple digit growth while holding senior positions including SVP Global Revenue and Strategy and Vice President of Advertising and Strategy.
Before joining Quartz, Robins was a senior director at NBC News Digital and Vice President of digital advertising at BBC Worldwide. Her early career included positions at The Weather Channel and OMD.
Robins sits on the Board of Directors of the Ad Council, IAB and the DCN. In 2018, Robins was named one of the industry insiders solving digital advertising’s problems by Business Insider, and in 2017 she was recognized by Ad Age’s 40 under 40.
Robins graduated from Rutgers University.
Melissa RocaStudied Public Relations and Advertising at City College and bring several years of experience working in administrative roles.
Mike RomoffMike Romoff runs the Global Agency and Channel Sales team, helping the world’s biggest advertisers and their clients harness the power of LinkedIn’s platform. His breadth of experience spans a 19-year career where he has held key General Management, Operations, and Business Development positions at companies such as NBC, IDG, 360i and The Industry Standard Magazine (back in the day). Prior to his current role, Mike led the Global Sales and Advertising Operations teams at LinkedIn, responsible for the overall day-to-day operations of its advertising business. Mike holds a BA from Amherst College and an MBA from Columbia Business School as well as a 200 hour yoga instructor certification. He currently lives in Manhattan with his wife Heatherlynn and two children Niko and Bianka.
Scott RosenbergScott joined Roku in 2012 as Vice President of Advertising to develop and lead the company’s advertising business and was promoted in 2017 to GM and SVP of Advertising. In late 2017 he became GM of Platform Business overseeing both advertising and content and services. Before joining Roku, Scott co-founded and served as CEO of Umami Co, a companion TV mobile application company. Prior, Scott served as Vice President of Advanced Advertising at Rovi Corporation, where he led advertising sales. He also served as Director of Product Management at BlackArrow, Inc., a TV ad serving technology company. Earlier in his career, Scott held product and engineering roles focused on advertising and video technologies at Replay TV, Analog Devices and Intel Corporation. Scott holds a bachelor’s degree. in Computer Science from Princeton University and was a Fulbright Fellow to Japan. He also holds a master’s degree in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and an M.B.A. from the Sloan School at MIT.
Speaking experienceScott is a regular on the speaking circuit, participating in conferences including Advertising Week, IAB Digital Newfronts, SXSW, NATPE, Video Ad Summit, On Demand Summit and many more.
Randall RothenbergRandall Rothenberg is the Executive Chair of the Interactive Advertising Bureau, the trade association for digital media and marketing in the United States. Among the IAB’s 750 member companies are such major platforms as Google, Facebook, Microsoft, and Snap; the nation’s most important ad-supported media companies, including The New York Times, Walt Disney Co., NBC Universal, ViacomCBS, Hearst Magazines, Spotify, Verizon Media, Hulu, Warner Media, LinkedIn, and Meredith; incumbent and disruptor brands, including Coca-Cola, Walmart, Procter & Gamble, Hubble Contacts, ThirdLove, General Motors, Johnson & Johnson, and Citigroup; and scores of technology and data companies, among them Mediamath, LiveRamp, Quantcast, and Pubmatic.
Doug RozenAs CEO of dentsu Media across the Americas, Doug supports 3,000+ of the most forward-thinking media experts (across Carat, iProspect, dentsu X, 360i, Amplifi and more) who every day strive to deliver like never before. Known for exploiting the intersection of data, technology, and creativity to help modern marketers champion progress, Doug has been recognized for leading businesses through digital transformation and fortunate to be a part of numerous industry firsts.
Doug most recently served as the first Chief Media Officer at award-winning agency 360i, where he helped them become a Forrester leader, MediaPost Agency of the Year, and win over 20 new clients. He joined 360i from OMD, where he led all digital and innovation activities and drove client relationships with Apple, Hasbro, Eli Lilly, Disney, among others. Before OMD, Doug served as Chief Innovation Officer and SVP, General Manager at Meredith, where he led mobile and social activity, oversaw new products, and ran the entertainment client portfolio. Prior to Meredith, Doug was SVP at Carlson Marketing, where he developed and managed the global loyalty provider’s agency services unit including, creative, media, mobile, social, and strategy offerings. While there, he also helped in its acquisition by Aimia. Doug also served as Senior Partner and Managing Director at JWT, where he established[email protected]and combined it with JWT’s direct and data offerings to form[email protected]This ultimately led to one of the top non-traditional agencies at its time. Doug’s prior experience includes many firsts: building the first intranet for a major auto OEM, designing the first online acquisition campaign for a national ISP, and streaming one of the first collegiate football games.
Doug is a cancer survivor and proud advocate for Stand Up to Cancer. He is an avid cyclist and currently lives in CT with his wife and two teenage children.
Tim RuderTim has more than 20 years experience working with digital news organizations to grow audiences, institutionalize editorial best practices, create new products and get the most from tools and technologies to drive great results.
He understands traffic opportunities from all sources (search, social, paid marketing, PR, etc.) and how a publisher can capture and keep new audiences while being true to their voice, brand and strategy. He is most effective when working across publisher departments — editorial, tech, marketing and sales — helping the individuals and teams maximize their contribution to common goals.
Tim’s results include: capturing the highest share of a target audience of any news web site, substantially increasing site engagement, improving visibility in search, increasing reach in social networks and more. Typical engagements will see improvements of 20 to 100% in the first year.
Ruder developed product lines for publishers that exceeded $40 million in second year revenues (and have continued growing), improved workflows to lower costs and developed new business strategies for publishers in need of a pivot. In addition to delivering business results, Tim’s work has received many industry accolades, including multiple Eppy’s, Webby’s, a Wammie and one of the first 1to1 Innovator Awards (for his work on personalization in news).
Tim is also an accomplished public speaker and has appeared at the World Association of Newspapers (WAN/IFRA) World Congress, multiple appearances at SxSW and numerous appearance at a variety of search, marketing and product development conferences.
Rosemarie RyanRosemarie is a renowned leader, brand builder and rabble-rouser in the marketing industry.
She began her career in account planning and was among the first wave of Brits to import the Account Planning discipline to the United States at Chiat Day. As president of K&B, she took it from a 30-person boutique to a 400-person strong award-winning agency. She then took on the mantle of leading the 125 year-old JWT into the 21st century. In her tenure she restructured the workplace, the teams and creative product, and doubled the profits of the agency. Not satisfied with reinventing an agency, she decided it was time to reinvent the industry.
In September of 2010, Rosemarie, along with her creative partner Ty Montague, left JWT and founded co:collective. Co: is a Storydoing collective focused on business and brand transformation and is fortunate enough to be working with likes of YouTube, Infiniti , Google and Timberland.
In September 2012, Rosemarie was named as one of the ‘100 most influential Women in Advertising’, by Advertising Age.
Paul RyanPaul Ryan is the chief technology officer at OpenX where he oversees the company’s technology and product development. He leads a global team of more than 150 engineers, data scientists and product managers tasked with fostering the development of new, innovative programmatic technology. Prior to OpenX, Paul held CTO roles at Yellow Pages Group, Leads360, and Overture. During his time at Overture, Paul was principally responsible for engineering the world’s first high-scale auction-based market for the web, an innovation that established the foundation of today’s $45 billion programmatic marketplace.
Paul holds a BSE, EECS from Princeton University, an MS in Computer Science from John Hopkins University and an MBA from the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania.
John SabellaExperienced Chief Technology Officer with a demonstrated history of working in the internet industry. Strong information technology professional skilled in Cloud Transformation, Digital Strategy, Mobile Applications, Software as a Service (SaaS), and Start-ups.
Positive, proven, and successful, technology executive has the strategic vision for developing assets and adding the greatest value. Driven by big challenges, to build the next “big thing”, to hire the teams, to build the processes, to get everyone producing at their best potential and to collaborate with clients. Committed to the company’s business objectives and selfless in ethos, I believe that facts should drive direction, and that performance needs to be measured with clear goals and objectives.
David Sable“Never forget that only dead fish swim with the current.”These words of British author-journalist Malcolm Muggeridge, spoken many years ago, are a mantra for David Sable, whose advertising career spans more than 30 years. His profound commitment to innovative customer-centric advertising continues to power his journey.
David was appointed Global CEO of Y&R in February 2011, but his ties to the agency date back to his first job in the industry, when he joined Y&R’s training program in 1976. He later went on to Wells Rich Greene, then co-founded the award-winning Israeli agency, Mimsar-Arielly. On his return to the U.S., David spent time at PR giant Burson-Marsteller and Cohn & Wolfe (both parts of the Y&R group), where he was counselor to clients like Colgate-Palmolive, Digital Equipment Corporation and Coca-Cola.
David rejoined Y&R in 1990 to lead the United States Postal Service account, where his service approach helped direct a new messaging platform and other assets, including its logo, which are still in use today. Under David’s leadership of the USPS team, Y&R created the industry’s very first website for a client.
An early digital entrepreneur, David co-founded Genesis Direct, an innovative, web-based firm instrumental in establishing a direct-to-fan Internet presence for the National Hockey league, Major League Baseball, National Football league and the National Basketball and the National Basketball Association.
For the 10 years prior to Y&R, David was vice chairman and COO at sibling company, Wunderman, where he was responsible for managing their global marketing services network â€” and presided over its digital transformation and the creation of their digital offering. As a leading authority on digital marketing, David serves as an adviser to many digital start-ups in the world.
Not surprisingly, David has an active presence in the blogosphere, with The Weekly Ramble, which he has been writing since 2006 and which has garnered a large audience. Fast Company recently invited David to become an expert blogger on corporate culture; his first blog for them, “Finding the ‘Colere’ in Corporate Culture,” debuted recently. Y&R’s global client, Xerox, asked him to share his thoughts on productivity on their blog, #FocusFriday: Reframing Productivity.
David is a Director at Large of the American Association of Advertising Agencies (the 4As) and was a founding member of its Digital Advisory Board. He has served on juries at the Cannes International Creative Festival, including the highly prestigious Titanium panel. He is a frequent speaker on the digital environment, for example, to Microsoft UK, where he spoke on how digital is driving every communication today. David is frequently tapped for his marketing and digital expertise throughout the industry and around the world. Recent interviews include Campaign Asia, Forbes on driving innovation, Forbes on how everything is digital, as well as Digiday and Microsoft Advertising.
Active in philanthropy and education all his life, David was named to the New Yorkers Volunteer State Office of National and Community Service Commission in 2010. Two years earlier, the Mayor of the City of New York, Michael R. Bloomberg, appointed him to serve as a member of the Cultural Advisory Committee of the New York City Department of Cultural Affairs.
David and his wife, Debbie, have two married daughters and Henry and Teddy, their treasured grandsons.
Gyanda SachdevaLena SafronLena Safron is an experienced graphic designer who has created for an eclectic collection of individuals, companies, and organizations. She has designed marketing materials for women’s fashion brands Vince Camuto and Jones New York while at Authentic Brands Group. Other work experience includes designing for entertainment marketing company Passion Point Collective and event planning company Drury Design Dynamics. She has also worked on the accounts of select entertainment and pharma clients. Lena received her BFA in Communications Design at Pratt Institute and her senior thesis work was featured at the Pratt Show for industry professionals. Offline, Lena enjoys going to concerts and Broadway shows, and in the past year has developed a love for hiking and the great outdoors. She stays on-trend creatively by following other artists on social media and visiting galleries and museums whenever possible. Lena is very excited to join IAB as the first in-house graphic designer!Jenny SchauerJenny Schauer currently holds a Media VP/Group Director role at Digitas where she’s found a home for the last eight years. During the majority of her tenure there she’s been guiding the strategic direction for a large financial services account in the Video Investment Lead role which oversees their total video strategy across linear and digital platforms. Additionally Jenny now leads the planning oversight for Hilton hotels, with a focus on advanced video strategies.
In addition to her day-to-day role, Jenny is also the national Video Center of Excellence lead at Digitas, heading up a cross-office COE team that’s shaping the video approach for Digitas overall. Through this role, she also acts the agency’s voice on digital video in the trades – frequently quoted in leading publications like AdAge, Digiday, Reuters, and eMarketer.
Jenny was also named the 2015 CIMA Rising Star, as well as one of a select few national 2015 Rising Stars from Cynopsis Media.
Susan SchiekoferSusan Schiekofer is the Chief Digital Investment Officer for GroupM North America. She is responsible for digital trading and implementation across all of GroupM’s agencies including Mindshare, MEC, MediaCom, Maxus, and Essence.
Susan’s digital skill set, coupled with her broader knowledge of trading best practices across all media formats, ensures that GroupM continues to lead the market with the best, most valuable and accountable digital solutions for clients of GroupM agencies.
She is figurative in GroupM’s efforts to improve the integrity of the digital marketplace in the U.S. by championing viewability, anti-fraud safeguards, measurement, and standards.
Schiekofer has been a leader in the digital media space at WPP and GroupM since 1994. She founded the digital media offering at Ogilvy & Mather, which was later rebranded to[email protected], and worked on accounts including IBM, TD Ameritrade and Lenovo, among many others. In 2010, Schiekofer joined MEC to head up the AT&T digital business, and soon became responsible for all of digital at MEC. In July of 2014, she moved to GroupM to lead digital investment for Maxus and MediaCom, and to assume responsibility for all of online video.
Wilfried SchobeiriWil Schobeiri is the Chief Technology Officer at MediaMath, the leading independent technology platform for Marketers. Based in Chicago, he oversees the technology strategy and architecture that power the operations of thousands of marketers globally. While his focus is primarily the development and operations of large-scale distributed systems, he’s also obsessed with building great teams and creating strong engineering cultures. A lifetime technologist and entrepreneur, Wil launched his first tech company at the age of 13 out of his parent’s basement. Prior to joining MediaMath, he led development at a number of startups, including Tap.Me, a gaming ad platform that was acquired by MediaMath in December 2012. Since then, he’s played a central role in MediaMath’s transformation into a platform-first technology organization. Wil is a proud college dropout.
Michael SchoenMichael Schoen is the VP, Marketing Solutions at Neustar, developing and perfecting an integrated platform that enables companies to win in the connected age. Michael oversees the end-to-end system of identity that gives marketers a complete, real-time portrait of their customers and prospects based on accurate data, enabling a personalized dialogue across all marketing channels. His leadership has been instrumental in architecting the industry’s most authoritative and real-time marketing platform, built on trusted identity across people, places, and things.
Prior to joining Neustar in 2014, Michael was the EVP, Product at Cadreon, IPG’s cross-channel audience measurement, management and buying platform. Michael was responsible for driving the product strategy, development, and technology partnerships that enabled Cadreon’s offerings across all addressable media. Prior to joining Cadreon, Michael was General Manager, Advertising Platforms and VP, Product & Technology at LookSmart, where he was responsible for building out paid search platform and publisher syndication business.
Michael holds an AB in Computer Science from Harvard College and an MBA from UCLA.
Michael ScottKatie ShellKatie joined IAB Tech Lab in May 2021. She works as a Data Coordinator. Katie is an alumna of Bucknell University in the Freeman College of Management where she earned a Bachelor’s degree in Markets, Innovation, and Design in 2020.
Sheila ShultzSteve SilversSomer SimpsonKate SloanKate Sloan is a Programmatic Sales Director at Hearst Magazines Digital Media (HMDM).
In this role, she helps advertisers connect with readers of Hearst Magazines’ portfolio of iconic brands – including ELLE, Esquire, Good Housekeeping – by utilizing evolving technologies to increase transactional efficiency and ROI. She helps lead a team of five programmatic sellers representing Hearst’s global magazine brands as well as Complex Media.
Prior to joining HMDM, Kate worked for Core Audience, a corporate-level group that unified data and ad tech partnerships across Hearst’s TV, Newspaper, and Magazine divisions.
Earlier in her career, Kate worked at Rocket Fuel (DSP) around the time of their IPO and helped to grow the company’s largest telecom and CPG accounts.
Alexus SmithAndrew SnyderKelsey SorensonDavid SpectorDave Spector is the Co-Founder of ThirdLove, the 3rd largest online bra and underwear company in America. Dave has always been an entrepreneur, starting his first company in college and another during business school. Prior to founding ThirdLove, he focused on consumer internet, e-commerce, and analytics investing as a Partner at Sequoia Capital. One investment, in Stella & Dot, got him particularly interested in female-focused e-commerce. Before Sequoia, Dave was at IBM and Google, where he helped lead Google’s first efforts in commerce with the launch of Google Checkout, Product Search, and Google Analytics. Outside of ThirdLove, he’s an angel investor in two dozen companies and an advisor to others.
Dave has been recognized as: National Retail Federation Disruptors, Goldman Sachs’ 100 Most Intriguing Entrepreneurs and EY Entrepreneur of the Year in Northern California. He is also a certified pilot and enthusiastically very unaccomplished as a triathlete.
Scott SpencerScott Spencer is the Director of Product Management, Sustainable Ads at Google. Scott sets the vision and strategy for Google’s work to create a long-term viable ads ecosystem for publishers, users, and advertisers. Scott and his team develop products that help Google to combat ad fraud, ad spam and malware, and maintain the integrity of broader display network. His team oversees Google’s advertising and publisher policies that help to protect people from harmful, misleading, offensive and annoying ads. As part of those efforts, Scott works with the Coalition for Better Ads, an industry group tasked to improve online ad experiences that drive people to install ad blockers and establish an industry-wide standard for ad experiences. In addition, Scott represents Google in industry forums like TAG and the IAB Tech Lab, help to develop and advocate for standards across the industry.
Throughout his time at Google, Scott has worked on nearly every product and platform in Google’s ads portfolio. He played an instrumental role in the development and launch of the DoubleClick Ad Exchange over 10 years ago as well as Google’s acquisition of Invite Media which eventually would become DoubleClick Bid Manager, Google’s demand side platform (DSP).
Before joining Google, Scott was a management consultant at Integral, Inc. providing strategy analysis to fortune 500 companies on Product Development Process and Customer Satisfaction leverage. Scott holds a BS in Economics from MIT.
David StaasDavid Staas is President of NinthDecimal, responsible for the company’s go-to-market strategy and overseeing marketing, product management, engineering, and research. A 20-year veteran of the mobile ecosystem, David has created break-through businesses and solutions in the advertising, marketing, and mobile infrastructure markets. At NinthDecimal, David has led the creation of Location Graph, the industry’s first mobile audience platform based on location behavior, as well as the company’s evolution into mobile and enterprise data services for the world’s leading brands.
Prior to NinthDecimal, David built one of the first mobile ad networks and mobile ad platforms at Ad Infuse (acquired by Velti). Prior to Ad Infuse, David led global product marketing at Openwave Systems, the company that created today’s mobile Internet. He also co-founded the Messaging Anti-Abuse Working Group, an industry consortium of mobile carriers, telcos, and media companies to combat spam. He joined Openwave through the acquisition of Software.com, where he led product management and market development for the company’s flagship communications product. David has also launched new services and new products at companies such as Deloitte Consulting and Coca-Cola, and is a frequent author and speaker at key industry events.
Nada StirrattNada C. Stirratt is the Vice President, North America, Global Business Group for Meta. Prior to Meta, Nada served as the Chief Executive Officer of Verve Wireless, Inc., a provider of SaS-location-based mobile advertising solutions for retail, auto, CPG, restaurants, and other drive-to-retail brand advertisers.
Nada also previously served as Chief Revenue Officer and Executive Vice President for Acxiom, the data-mining and analytics company. In this role, Nada led all of the client-facing areas of the business, including field, account management, and consulting across the globe.
Stirratt came to Acxiom with a proven track record of delivering transformational business results. Prior to Acxiom, she served as Chief Revenue Officer at MySpace, where she led global sales, strategy and advertising operations. Previously, Nada served as Executive Vice President of digital advertising at MTV Networks, where she successfully led the company’s aggressive expansion into the digital advertising arena across all properties, overseeing advertising sales, strategy and operations.
Earlier in her career, Nada was senior vice president and general manager of advertising sales at Advertising.com and also held senior positions with some of the world’s most well-known brands, including AOL, Moviefone, Hearst Publications and Condé Nast. Stirratt holds a bachelor’s degree in advertising from the University of Illinois. She is based in New York City.
Dan TaylorDan Taylor leads display advertising platform strategy for Google’s global business organization, focused on product innovation, commercialization and advertiser engagement at scale across Google Ads and Google Marketing Platform in all countries where Google operates.
Primary focus is on building and growing advertiser solutions and innovations in data strategy, inventory quality, ad formats, automated buying and measurement to power every ad experience and make the web and apps work for advertisers, publishers and consumers across devices.
Prior to his current role, Dan led high performing sales and activation teams in Search, Display, Video and Mobile as well as a long career in broadcast media sales. Dan is based in New York.
Ajit ThupilChristina Ting CuaChristina leads Product Marketing for all of Instagram’s Ad Solutions. This includes Instagram’s Brand and Direct Response solutions in both Feed and Stories. She was part of the early team that helped Instagram scale its monetization products and is passionate about helping marketers find success on Instagram. Prior to Instagram, Christina worked at Bain and Company in their LA and SF offices and Google’s NY office. Christina is a NorCal native, received a BS in Business Administration from UC Berkeley, and an MBA from Harvard Business School.
John TooheyJohn was the Group Vice President of Finance for Time Warner Cable Media in New York, serving as the finance lead for TWC’s $1 billion advertising arm.
Prior to this role, John spent a year establishing TWC’s change management function as Group Vice President of Operational Effectiveness. John coordinated process improvement activities across the company. John previously spent six years as a leader in TWC’s Corporate Finance group, including three years heading up TWC’s investor relations support and competitive analysis activities as Vice President of Financial Analysis and Special projects, as well as three years in charge of TWC’s Corporate Financial Planning and Analysis team.
John’s broad media finance background includes four years at Cablevision, seven years at CBS and five years at NBC, all with progressive management responsibilities. John also spent three years as a mid-career management consultant at Booz Allen Hamilton, advising a variety of clients both inside and outside the media industry.
John holds a bachelor’s degree in Government from Harvard University, and an MBA from Columbia Business School. He and his wife Kristin have three children and live in Westport, CT.
Zak TreuhaftJohn TrimbleJohn Trimble serves as the Chief Advertising Revenue Officer of SiriusXM, where he is responsible for all advertising revenue, strategic sales marketing, and advertising operations for SiriusXM, Pandora, Stitcher and Adswizz. Throughout his 11 years at SXM, he was part of the management team that built Pandora from a Start Up into the public markets and most recently combined the assets of SiriusXM into the advertising brand, SXM Media. SXM Media’s diverse revenue streams tap satellite, podcasting and streaming audio that reach consumers in their cars as well as on their computers, mobile phones, and consumer electronic devices. Prior to SiriusXM, John held several senior level roles overseeing Sales at Glam Media, Fox Interactive Media, and Phase 2 Media.
John received his BA from St. Lawrence University. He currently sits on the Interactive Advertising Board and the Mobile Media Association Board. He is also on the Board of the Danny Butler Memorial Fund and St. Vincent’s Hospital in Harrison, NY. He resides in Rye, New York with his wife, Maggie, and their four children, Molly, Jack, Colin, and Libby.
Joey TrotzJoey Trotz is a recognized industry leader and expert in digital advertising. For 20+ years, he has identified, built and implemented critical technologies supporting hundreds of millions of dollars in marketing budgets.
He is currently the Global Head of Technology for Watson Advertising where he leads engineering efforts for cognitive marketing and advertising tech. Mr. Trotz works on the policies, strategies, and roadmaps where technology and monetization intersect, focused on applying emerging technology including IBM Watson and IBM Blockchain in support of strategic goals.
Previously, Mr. Trotz held a variety of executive roles during his 18-year tenure at Turner Broadcasting.
Steve TruxalAs VP of Product Management, Steve oversees the publisher, marketplaces, and platform product groups at Xandr. He and his team set the strategy and roadmap, develop innovative products, and drive commercialization for key product offerings, including the adserver, SSP, media products, supply & demand quality, and DSP integrations. Steve joined AppNexus 2011, prior to the company’s acquisition by AT&T and subsequent evolution into Xandr. Throughout his tenure, Steve has been responsible for a multitude of different product areas, including the fraud prevention, the establishment of Prebid, identity, and consumer privacy & regulation. He’s led industry groups including TAG Anti-Malware and the IAB’s establishment of Transparency and Consent Framework for The GDPR.
Prior to AppNexus, Steve was a management consultant with McKinsey & Company at their NYC office. He specialized in high tech & media industries and advised the leadership of Fortune 100 companies on their strategy and operations. Steve holds a Ph.D. in mechanical engineering, a Masters in electrical engineering, and a Masters in mechanical engineering from The University of Michigan, where he focused on micro-electronic systems.
Dorothy TseDorothy Tse is the Vice President of Product at Quantcast. In her current role, Dorothy is responsible for scaling Quantcast’s Advertising product suite while developing new capabilities that drive value for customers. Dorothy most recently served as Head of Global Marketing Solutions Technology at Facebook where she led Product Management for global internal data products and internal CRM. Prior to Facebook, Tse spent time at Nielsen as SVP of Product Leadership responsible for their digital advertising measurement products and self service capabilities. She was previously Vice President of Product Management at advertising effectiveness company, Vizu which was acquired by Nielsen and led their acquisition activities. Dorothy holds a B.S. in International Business from the University of California, Davis.
Dana TunksAs Broadsign’s Chief Financial Officer, Dana Tunks oversees all financial reporting, treasury, corporate development, corporate finance and taxation and risk-management activities globally.
A seasoned professional, Dana has held roles as Chief Financial Officer and Advisory Board Member of software and technology companies in the healthcare, mobile commerce and emissions industries. She also spent over 23 years as a Senior Partner with Ernst & Young LLP, both in Audits and Consulting.
Dana is a Chartered Accountant and received her Honours Bachelor of Business Administration from Wilfrid Laurier University. Her community involvement has included the Audit Committee of Wilfrid Laurier University, Innovation Council at the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants and acting as President, Vice President and Audit Committee Chair of the Kitchener-Waterloo YWCA.
Lisa UtzschneiderLisa Utzschneider is the chief executive officer of Integral Ad Science and a member of the company’s board of directors. IAS is a global technology company that offers data and solutions to establish a safer, more effective advertising ecosystem. Lisa joined IAS as CEO in January 2019, bringing more than 20 years of digital advertising expertise and tech-industry leadership experience to the role.
Prior to joining IAS, Lisa held the position of chief revenue officer at Yahoo where she oversaw Yahoo’s global sales organization and provided solutions for the needs of advertisers worldwide. Lisa served as CRO up through the acquisition of Yahoo by Verizon in June 2017.
Previously, Lisa was Amazon’s Vice President of Global Advertising Sales, where she developed the company’s global advertising business through product, marketing, sales, and operations strategies, driving consistent revenue growth. Prior to Amazon, Lisa spent 10 years at Microsoft culminating in her role as General Manager of the national sales and service teams where she focused on driving revenue for the company’s top online advertising accounts. She also developed the U.S. advertising go-to-market strategy.
Lisa has previously served as a board member for the Ad Council and the Interactive Advertising Bureau, where she was also a member of the organization’s executive committee. Notable honors include: the Adweek 50, Business Insider’s “Most Powerful Women in Mobile Advertising”, New York Business Journal’s “Women of Influence” and Working Mother’s “50 Most Powerful Moms”. Lisa holds a bachelor’s degree from Bates College and a master’s degree in public administration from New York University. She resides in Greenwich, CT with her husband and two daughters.
Lisa ValentinoLisa recently joined Disney as EVP, Client & Brand Solutions reporting to President, Rita Ferro. Lisa and her division is challenged with architecting next generation partnerships rooted in insights, integrated content marketing, and digital for the multi-billion dollar company. Previously, Lisa was Executive Vice President of Revenue Innovation for Univision Communications Inc. (UCI), the leading media company serving Hispanic America. Valentino led UCI’s digital, integrated marketing and revenue teams to develop strategy and activation for customer solutions. Prior to joining UCI, Valentino worked at Condé Nast where she served as Chief Revenue Officer, overseeing growth as well as strategic planning to accelerate new revenue growth and transform Condé Nast from a publisher to a client led media partner and brand storyteller. Prior to Condé Nast, Valentino worked at ESPN where she oversaw a division responsible for over $1 billion in revenue focused on multimedia partnerships across the Company’s portfolio, including domestic and international TV, digital, events, and print. She also managed all digital and mobile ad sales revenue for the company in her first 3 years with the company. Valentino graduated from Lafayette College with dual degrees in English and Art History and played D1 soccer. She currently resides in Westchester and is wife to Ami and mother to Liam (9) and Olivia (7).
Rik van der KooiRik van der Kooi is the Corporate Vice President of Microsoft Advertising. In this capacity, he leads the company’s global advertising business and its sales, marketing, support and partnership organization, which is focused on delivering advertising and monetization solutions for marketers. Rik also plays a key leadership role in an evolved strategy across Microsoft’s search, advertising, news and browser businesses, holding accountability for growth and development as well as expansion of offerings for enterprise and consumer customers.
Under Rik’s leadership, the Microsoft Advertising business has grown to over $9B in revenue and the team has successfully formed numerous industry partnerships with Verizon, Yahoo!, AppNexus, AOL and others. He is a prior Chairman and current board member of the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB). He is an executive sponsor of the Blacks at Microsoft (BAM) employee resource group and considers himself an ally to all marginalized populations.
Prior to his current role as CVP, Rik served as the Chief Operating Officer and Chief Financial Officer of the Online Services Division at Microsoft. Before that, he held the roles of Chief Financial Officer of Windows; General Manager of Finance and Administration for the Sales, Marketing and Services Group in EMEA, based in Paris; and Finance Director for the Benelux countries. Prior to joining Microsoft in 1999, Rik was Chief Financial Officer for IBC Vehicles, Ltd., a subsidiary of General Motors Corp. in the United Kingdom.
Rik earned his Master of Business Administration from Instituto de Estudios Superiores de la Empresa (IESE) in Barcelona and his Bachelor of Business Administration from Nyenrode Business University in the Netherlands.
Rik is married with three kids and enjoys playing music and soccer in his spare time.
Julie Van UllenJulie Van Ullen is the Managing Director for US and Canada for Rakuten Marketing. In her role, Julie is responsible for overseeing the commercial organization selling and supporting the holistic suite of Rakuten Marketing’s affiliate and performance marketing solutions for Brands, Agencies, and Publishers. Additionally, Julie drives the strategy and vision related to all aspects of go-to-market for Rakuten’s Affiliate+ (data, prospecting, retargeting, social, search) offerings. Prior to joining Rakuten Marketing, Julie was the Vice President of Digital, for FreeWheel. In her role, she served as digital segment GM to oversee product vision, client acquisition, and overall go-to-market strategy for FreeWheel’s suite of video ad serving and monetization solutions. Before FreeWheel, Julie served as Vice President of Publisher Solutions at premium ad exchange, OpenX, overseeing the Sales function for the East Coast and before that as Vice President of Member Services at the IAB where she was responsible for attracting new members and developing a portfolio of opportunities and initiatives to keep current members engaged. As a part of serving IAB’s membership, Julie oversaw IAB’s elite Committees and Councils, charged with putting industry best practices and thought leadership into the marketplace. Those focal areas included Native, Programmatic, Digital Video, AdvancedTV, Digital Audio, Social Media, and Gaming.
Prior to making her transition to the digital space, Julie was an Editor at The Taunton Press in the books division of Fine Woodworking and Fine Homebuilding and still enjoys furniture-making in her free time. When not on the job, ex-opera singer Julie sings with the classic rock cover band.
Donia VanceDonia Vance, joins the IAB as Senior Content Director. She brings a wide breadth of experience to her role including go-to-market strategy, content development, experiential programming and brand marketing. Donia was previously the Senior Partnerships Director at Unger Media’s Greenwich Wine + Food Festival where she managed and oversaw national accounts including PepsiCo, Jeep and Anheuser-Busch. Prior to that, she was the Executive Director Customer Engagement and Events at WebMD where she created strategy for marketing and thought leadership activations that drove brand awareness and revenue for both the Pharma and CPG sides of the business. She has also worked at Hearst, Conde Nast, Martha Stewart and Rolling Stone, where she first developed her passion for media and experiential marketing.
Megan VasilesMegan Vasiles is a digital marketing strategist with over a decade of experience helping global organizations optimize marketing plans and build long-term strategies for success.
She lives in Manhattan and hopes to adopt a cat soon! In her downtime you can find her writing science fiction, baking tasty vegan treats, or wandering the aisles of the nearest bookstore.
Anudit VikramAnudit Vikram is a business and technology leader with over 20 years of experience, 15+ of which have been in the advertising and marketing technologies space. His deep experience in data centric product innovation and design and innate understanding of the ad-tech space make him a frequent contributor to industry publications, conferences, and round-tables.
As the SVP of Products for MediaMath, Anudit is responsible for the strategy and roadmap of the entire suite of MediaMath’s product capabilities. He drives the evolution, positioning, and launch of new features and programs across all regions and brings MediaMath’s product vision to life.
Prior to MediaMath, Anudit worked at Dun & Bradstreet, Merkle, Yahoo!, Microsoft, and other noteworthy organizations leading teams and – in his words – “building cool stuff … changing the world one release at a time!” A past board member of the IAB Data Center of Excellence and co-chair of the B2B Committee, Anudit is also active in helping shape the industry as it shape-shifts through its maturation.
Anudit holds a Masters in Technology Management from Columbia University and a Bachelors in Engineering from the University of Pune (India). He lives in NYC with his wife and is an avid photographer and optimistic golfer in his spare time.
Deborah WahlDeborah Wahl was appointed General Motors Global Chief Marketing Officer (CMO) on Sept. 1, 2019. She previously served as the Global CMO of Cadillac, where she guided the directional shift of the brands’ look and feel – with bright visuals and heavy hitting anthems. She also took the brand to new places like ComplexCon, the PGA, and launched aggressive campaigns to bring customers to showrooms, like XT4 – 4TX. Rooted firmly in the school of performance marketing, she always drives her teams to use data to change how they seek and engage with consumers. Prior to joining General Motors, Deborah served as the Senior Vice President and CMO for McDonald’s from 2014 to 2017, where she played a key role in the brand’s turnaround. In addition to McDonald’s, Deborah has held a number of CMO and Vice President positions, including at PulteGroup , Chrysler and Lexus. Deborah earned a bachelor’s degree in Economics from Wellesley College and an MBA from The Wharton School. She also has a master’s degree from The Lauder Institute, University of Pennsylvania. Forbes named her to its Most Influential CMO list in 2018 and 2019, and she was recognized as one of 2019 AdWeek 50 Marketing and Tech Execs. Deborah is an active business leader who serves on the boards of Groupon, Mediaocean and The Mobile Marketing Association (MMA), as well as on the Board of Trustees of Cranbrook Educational Community.
Steve WaxSteve Wax attended Reed College and the UCLA Film School; he received one of the first American Institute short film grants, was a member of the landmark San Francisco film collective, Cine Manifest.
Steve was also a founding board member of the Independent Feature Project. In the first phase of his career, he produced a number of independent feature films.
Steve founded Chelsea Pictures in 1987; Chelsea pioneered the use of feature and documentary directors in commercial production.
Under Chelsea’s banner Wax produced the feature film Unmade Beds. He also exec-produced the Oscar Nominated short film, Killing Joe, and the Emmy-nominated documentary Following Sean.
In 2000 Steve began working with two of the Blair Witch filmmakers, forming Campfire, the narrative ad agency. Campfire’s social marketing projects include brand clients such as GM, Verizon, Dr Pepper/Snapple, Harley-Davidson, and many entertainment brands, including True Blood, Game of Thrones, and Shark Week. Campfire is now a division of Sapient Nitro and the Publicis Groupe.
Steve is now a partner at The Cooke Wax Partnership, a two year old agency that combines brand strategy with social marketing. Among Cooke Wax’s clients are IMAX, United Way of NYC, Libertine drinks and TmaxSoft.
He’s also a member of the Agency Advisory Board of the Interactive Agency Bureau, and a longstanding board member of Issue Project Room, the landmark experimental theater in Brooklyn.
Ken WeinerKen Weiner leads the engineering, product, and supply teams behind the industry’s top computer vision platform for marketers and rights holders. As an active member of the ad tech community, Weiner is a guest columnist for VentureBeat and Forbes, a frequent speaker at conferences and a participant of industry groups such as IAB’s OpenRTB Working Group. He also runs the LA AdTech Meetup which brings together ad tech engineers and product managers. Weiner was LA Business Journal’s 2015 CTO of the Year, and in 2003, he was included in the InfoWorld 100 for his work on uPortal, an open-source web portal framework for the higher education community.
Before coming to GumGum, Weiner was the Director of Engineering at the lead-generation platform LowerMyBills.com, acquired by Experian in 2005. He has also worked as an open-source software consultant, a project manager and an instructor at Interactive Business Solutions, acquired by Unicon Inc. in 2003. Weiner received a B.S. from UCLA and currently lives in Los Angeles. Away from the office, he enjoys mountain biking, hiking, California native plants, jazz music and playing the saxophone.
Jason WhiteJason White is the Senior Vice President & GM of Global Programmatic Revenue & Partnerships for CBS Interactive as well as serving as the Co-Chairman of the Programmatic Council at the IAB and board member of IAB Tech Lab. Jason has extensive experience in online digital media and marketing, specifically centered on development and implementation of best-of-breed digital strategies for both digital publishers and advertisers. He has proven success in analyzing consumer behavior trends and implementing brand, direct response and digital monetization programs with a strong background in strategy, management, sales, marketing and product development. Triple-digit revenue growth through customer acquisition and monetization initiatives can be attributed to White’s work with various Fortune 100 companies and start-ups.
Before CBSi, White was an SVP and GM at OpenX and EVP of Marketing at TrueCar. Prior to OpenX, White was SVP and GM at the FOX Audience Network building the MyAds ad platform, in addition to the third party network and the first RTB exchange, which was among the Top 5 ad networks per ComScore. White has also held roles at Bank of America and LowerMyBills.
Jason serves on the advisory boards of Convertro, TrueCar, and OpenX and graduated from the University of Georgia.
Grant WhitmoreGrant Whitmore is SVP, Chief Digital Operations Officer at Tribune Publishing where he is responsible for Tribune’s digital operation strategy and execution. Grant’s focus includes improving monetization and revenue delivery across all Tribune properties, generating corporate-wide advertising growth, strengthening local and national sales efforts, and improving overall digital operations. Prior to his tenure at Tribune, Grant held a variety of digital leadership positions at companies ranging from startups to global media properties.
Bryan WienerBryan Wiener is CEO of digital agency 360i. Under his leadership, 360i has earned a spot on Ad Age’s coveted “Agency A-List” and Fast Company’s “World’s Most Innovative Companies” roster, helping clients like Coca-Cola, Kraft Foods, Diageo and NBC Universal engage their target audiences across the ever-changing digital landscape. Mediaweek has named Bryan a Top 50 person in media two years running for his visionary leadership within the industry and recently named him a Media All-Star.
Bryan’s background includes a series of senior management positions at Net2Phone Global Services, a pioneer in VoIP communications technology. Prior to that, he served as General Manager at TheGlobe.com and Director of Business Development at Standard and Poor’s. Bryan is Vice Chairman of the AAAA Digital Board and serves on the AAAA National Board of Directors and the IAB Agency Advisor Board. He is also an advisor to NYU’s Media & Entertainment Student & Alumni Associations.
Bryan holds an MBA from the Stern School of Business at NYU and a BA in History from Syracuse University.
Follow Bryan on Twitter at @bwiener.
Rob WilkRob Wilk leads the advertising team at Microsoft and is responsible for building and scaling Microsoft’s search/native advertising offerings with nearly $10 billion in revenue annually. Rob manages the sales, marketing, operations, retail media and partnerships teams with more than 2,000 employees across the globe.
Rob has 25 years of advertising and media experience with the majority specifically focused on digital media and paid search on both the agency and publisher sides. Before joining Microsoft, Rob was the founding Vice President of Sales at Foursquare, responsible for building the sales team and leading sales initiatives across the Foursquare brand and agency partners. Prior to Foursquare, Rob worked at Yahoo leading a team of US- and Canada-based employees tasked with driving optimal paid search performance for Yahoo’s biggest advertisers with yearly revenue of $1 billion. He oversaw the field search account management team, the global search account management team and the award-winning search optimization and strategy team.
Rob is a nationally recognized media expert and has spoken at Cannes, Advertising Week, Search Engine Strategies Conference, Search Marketing Expo Conference, Search Insider Summits and many more. He also actively serves on the board of SCOPE, anorganization that provides summer camp scholarships to children from underserved communities.
John WinsorJohn Winsor is a leading strategic marketing and product innovation thinker known for his work in collaboration, co-creation and crowdsourcing. He is the CEO of Victors & Spoils, the world’s first creative advertising agency built on crowdsourcing principles and, in 2011, a business named to Advertising Age’s “Agency A-List 10 to Watch” list and Mashable’s Top 5 Digital Agencies.
Before founding Victors & Spoils, Winsor was Vice President and Executive Director of Strategy and Innovation at Crispin Porter + Bogusky, helping the company become the most awarded advertising agency in the world in 2008 and 2009. He brought his co-creation philosophy to the agency that formed the underpinning of the agency’s strategy practice that fueled work such as, Dominos, “Transparency,” Best Buy’s “Twelpforce” and Microsoft’s “I’m a PC.”Prior to CPB, he founded his own company, Radar Communications, in 1998 â€“ with Nike as its first client â€“ and sold it to CP+B in 2007. At Radar, Winsor used co-creation, strategy and academic-based market intelligence tools to help some of the country’s most progressive companies learn from key voices in their communities.
Winsor was a journalist before founding Radar, building a magazine publishing company devoted to sports that included mountain biking, in-line skating and extreme skiing. In 1990, he acquired the rights to publish a then-struggling magazine, Women’s Sports & Fitness. Within three years, he turned that magazine around and launched several other highly profitable titles and events, including The Gravity Games. He sold the business to Conde Nast in 1998.
Winsor is a frequent industry speaker and respected author. He gave the speech “The Trials and Tribulations of Harnessing the Chaos of Abundance” at the Guardian UK summit in Cannes. He spoke, along with Mark-Hans Richer, CMO of Harley-Davidson, at the M50 Summit. He was recently interviewed by Harvard Business School for a study on crowdsourcing in the agency environment. He will be speaking at the 2013 Mirren conference in New York City.
His books include “Beyond the Brand: Why Engaging the Right Customers is Essential to Winning in Business,” “Spark: Be more Innovative through Co-Creation,” “Baked In: Creating Products and Businesses That Market Themselves” (with Alex Bogusky) and “Flipped: How Bottom-Up Co-Creation is Replacing Top-Down Innovation.” Baked In, a bestseller, was named an award winner in the marketing category for the 2009 800-CEO-Read Business Book Awards.
He was recently featured in the book “Pioneers of Digital” a showcase of success stories from leaders in advertising, marketing, search and social media, which credited him with turning his “â€¦wealth of communication and digital experienceâ€¦into a crowdsourcing (ad)venture.”Throughout his career Winsor has been deeply involved in the start-up and technology communities. He was a founding investor in Nau, the sustainable clothing company and has been on the board of directors of Black Diamond Equipment and Lijit Technologies.
Outside of work he pursues his passions of climbing, skiing, cycling and surfing. Among his accomplishments, he set the world record for the ascent and round-trip of Kilimanjaro.
Winsor earned a bachelor’s degree from Colorado College and an MBA from the Daniels College of Business at the University of Denver.
Rachel XanttopoulosRachel Xanttopoulos is the Product Marketing Lead for Instagram Business Verticals, the ads innovation team at Instagram. In this role, Rachel focuses on building new ad formats to create advertiser value for specific industry verticals such as Retail and Entertainment. Rachel is passionate about the intersection of tech and media—after starting her career at the Boston Consulting Group (BCG), Rachel worked as a Manager in the New York Times Corporate Strategy and Business Development Group, and then as a Product Manager for Kindle at Amazon. Rachel holds an MBA from the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University.
Joanne ZaiacAs President of the DigitasLBi New York region, Joanne is responsible for driving the development and growth of the NYC and Atlanta offices. She leads a team overseeing the strategy and execution of Digitas services across the region’s client base (including American Express, Aetna, Comcast, Delta, and Travelers). During her tenure as President, she has driven significant expansion and growth of Digitas New York, adding several Fortune 500 clients and recruiting some of the industry’s top talent. Under Joanne’s leadership, the NY & Atlanta offices received more accolades as a “Best Place to Work” than ever before in their history. Joanne has over 30 years of advertising industry experience. She has led innovative, strategic & cross channel marketing programs that have built brand equity for national brands. Her career as an integrated marketer began in general advertising at Havas Dentsu Marsteller. She then spent 14 years in Direct Marketing at Wunderman Worldwide/Young & Rubicam. She joined Digitas in 1999 to gain more experience in digital marketing. Joanne serves on the Board of Directors for Junior Achievement New York, the[email protected]Advisory Board, is an AWNY (Advertising Women New York) Executive Member, and is on the IAB (Interactive Advertising Bureau) Agency Advisory Board. She was honored in 2011 by AWNY and Working Mother Magazine as Advertising Working Mother of the Year. She is also an honored recipient of the Academy of Women Achiever’s (YWCA) Women Achiever Award. Joanne graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University with a BA in History and Literature, and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa. She lives in Manhattan with her husband and three children.
Joe ZawadzkiMediaMath’s CEO Joe Zawadzki has spent his career redefining the marketing and advertising industries through software and data sciences. He has created and scaled companies with a combined $2B in market value, personally invested in a range of start-ups and is sought after for his vision on the future of technology.
Throughout his career representing marketers at top-tier agencies and Fortune 500 companies such as AOL, American Express, IAC, Verizon and Vonage, Joe has focused on the integration of media, data and data sciences, in software. That reached its peak with the founding of MediaMath in 2007, a company credited with starting the programmatic revolution with the first demand-side platform. MediaMath’s offering, centered around the TerminalOne software, powers the marketing practice of more than 3,500 brands worldwide.
Prior to MediaMath, Joe was Founder, President and Chairman of Poindexter Systems / [x+1] a pure-play marketing optimization enterprise, where he helped found and incubate Right Media, which sold to Yahoo! in 2007. He has been an active champion of digital media and the broader NYC startup ecosystem, having made investments in over 50 companies including 33Across, Accordant, AppNexus, CreditKarma, DataMinr, Electronifi, Integral Ad Science, Namely, Optoro, Sourcepoint, and Vistar Media.
Joe serves on the Executive Committee and Board of the Direct Marketing Association, an almost century-old trade association focused on serving the interests of consumers and brands through data-driven marketing, and of Hope for Vision, an organization dedicated to raising money for the development of treatments and cures for blinding diseases, with particular focus on retinal degenerative diseases.
He is a graduate of Harvard University and was a Teaching Fellow in cosmology, set theory and the history of science. He lives in New York City with his wife, Daria, and their children Dune and Jack.
Sheng ZhouSheng Zhou serves as General Manager of Product at TikTok Ads. In this role, he is responsible for the TikTok Ads Platform development as well as management of advertiser growth for the company. He also leads the company’s efforts on a number of new monetization projects, including the recently launched TikTok Creator Marketplace.
With a rich background in business and product development in the IT space, Zhou has honed his expertise both as an entrepreneur and in senior leadership positions at several leading global technology companies, including Alibaba Group and Microsoft. Versatile and quick to adapt to rapidly changing market environments, Zhou excels at building robust teams from the ground up and cultivating early stage products alongside managing and commercializing complex business initiatives.
Prior to joining TikTok, Zhou served as Vice President at Alibaba Entertainment Group, primarily focusing on Youku’s advertising business and user operation. Before Youku was acquired by Alibaba, Zhou served as Corporate Vice President of Youku Tudou Inc., where he led R&D efforts and drove the development of advertising services and a PGC/UGC content ecosystem.
Zhou began his career with Microsoft, undertaking several product management roles throughout a 10-year tenure across multiple products, including Office, CRM, Windows Mobile and Online Advertising.
Zhou received a master’s degree in Management Information Systems from the University of Iowa and a bachelor’s degree in Computer Science from Peking University.
Julian ZilberbrandJulian Zilberbrand is the Executive Vice President of Audience Science at Viacom. Zilberbrand oversees key areas in the data strategy division including: audience onboarding and segmentation, advanced analytics and digital media executions. His team is responsible for the management and aggregation of data across all of Viacom’s media properties. Data is used to inform all aspects of media and programming at Viacom from sales to investment. His team works closely with groups across the organization to help enable a data driven approach to business which is paramount to success in today’s media landscape.
Prior to joining Viacom, Zilberbrand was Executive Vice President of Activation Standards, Insights and Technology at ZenithOptimedia. In this role, he managed the activations standards, digital operations, analytics, technology and strategic partnerships groups. Before joining Zenith, he was SVP, global digital director, strategic partnerships and technology solutions at Starcom Mediavest Group. Prior to joining the agency world in 2004, Zilberbrand held product specialist and client service roles at Eyeblaster and developed the company’s Eyeblaster University training program. Earlier in his career, he worked at Doubleclick as a project manager and technical analyst.
In addition to his work responsibilities, he held advisor roles for the IAB, 4A’s and the iMedia conferences. Zilberbrand is known as a vocal leader in the industry covering a wide array of topics from viewability with the 3MS Blue Ribbon committee to data and general industry trends. From 2013-2014, Zilberbrand chaired the Digital Committee for the Media Ratings Council and was recognized by the organization for his leadership and service. In 2014, he received the AdMonster Digital Media Leadership Award and the Marketers Choice Awards named him the Data, Analytics and Operations Innovator of the year for exemplary leadership in digital marketing.
Jianna CaronanJianna is a digital native – creating graphics, editing videos, and growing social media pages since 2010. Formerly an engineering student, she has had the pleasure of supporting brands and organizations on campus, through internships, and in a freelance capacity. Jianna received her Associates from the County College of Morris and is a proud alumna of Rutgers Business School where she received a Bachelor of Science in Marketing in 2021.
Jerry DischlerJerry Dischler is a Vice President and General Manager at Google, and oversees Google’s Advertising products including search, display, shopping, travel and video advertising, as well as analytics.
A 10+ year Ads veteran, Jerry led Google to move beyond plain text ads to deeper experiences, including the development of Ad Sitelinks and Product Listing Ads. Through various leadership roles on the team, he’s played an important role in defining the future of advertising at Google including leading the transition from desktop to mobile advertising, accelerating direct response advertising on YouTube, and developing new ad products for SMBs.
Prior to his current role, Jerry led the product and engineering teams for ads on Google’s owned and operated properties (Search, YouTube, Maps, Gmail, Discover), buying platforms (Google Ads, Search Ads 360, Display & Video 360), and Google’s home-grown sales and support platform. Earlier in his career at Google, Jerry led Google’s commerce products, including Google Checkout (now Google Pay) and Google Product Search (now Google Shopping).
Before Google, Jerry served as the Director of Engineering at Avolent where he was instrumental in developing the company’s award-winning billing and payment products. He also worked in engineering and leadership roles at Hyperion, Sana Security, and Accenture, where his work focused on enterprise billing, customer care, and security software.
Jerry earned his bachelor’s degree from the University of Chicago and his MBA from The Wharton School of Business.
Chad EngelgauChad Engelgau serves as Acxiom’s President and Chief Executive Officer, providing strategic leadership to the organization, which focuses on helping brands better use data, identity and technology solutions to understand people and create growth for their businesses. Chad is also a founding member of Acxiom’s IDEA (Inclusion, Diversity, Equity and Awareness) Council and the executive sponsor for two of Acxiom’s Business Resource Groups, Acxiom Women LEAD and Acxiom Black Employee Network.
Previously, Chad served as Global Chief Data Strategist at Kinesso, the marketing intelligence unit of The Interpublic Group of Companies, Inc. (IPG), Acxiom’s parent company. Chad joined Kinesso after spending 13 years at Acxiom, where he held a variety of key leadership roles, including Chief Marketing Officer and Head of Strategy. Over his tenure he was responsible for leading data and identity product management and strategy as well as product marketing.
Before joining Acxiom, Chad spent nine years at Dell Inc., rising from product engineering manager to corporate strategist for the Texas-based technology company. Prior to his years at Dell, Chad held various product management and technical roles at other enterprise companies.
Anne FrisbieAnne is SVP of Global Brand & Programmatic at InMobi. Anne joined InMobi in 2008. Prior to InMobi, Anne managed revenue for Yahoo! as Vice President of Category and Sales Intelligence, providing strategic insights and digital media solutions to leading brands and agencies. A digital-media industry veteran of over 20 years, Anne’s experience also includes cofounding an e-commerce company, executing some of the first search marketing campaigns in the industry at AltaVista and Overture, and directing publisher development at what is now most famously known as Elon Musk’s first start-up, Zip2.
Anne is an active member in the mobile community. In 2011 she was selected as one of Mobile Entertainment Magazine’s Top 10 Women in Mobile and in 2012 became Business Insiders #6 in their Most Powerful Woman in Mobile Advertising. In 2011 and 2012, Anne Frisbie served on the North America board of the MMA. In 2013, Anne was named a co-chair for the IAB’s mobile advertising committee, and a Board of Director member for the IAB’s Mobile Marketing Center of Excellence.
Anne holds a Bachelor Degree in Economics from Georgetown University. Anne is an avid wine collector, cocktail maker, loves playing duplicate bridge and is a happy mom of three children.
Barbara KrzanickaBarbara has been an Executive Assistant for 20 years, 4 years have been spent in the not-for-profit world.
She has a varied background in complex calendar management, project management, and events coordination.
Barbara holds a B.A. in Criminal Justice from John Jay College of Criminal Justice.
Jonathan MoralesJonathan Morales has a decade of experience helping nonprofits derive value from their data. In his most recent role at NPR, Jonathan led the fundraising and finance teams’ inhouse migration to Salesforce, leveraging the platform’s flexibility to support network fundraising, optimize complex business processes, and surface relevant information. Jonathan previously held database management roles at the USO and the National Trust for Historic Preservation, and consulted for other nonprofits. Jonathan holds degrees in history and music from Georgetown University and Oberlin College and Conservatory.
Ryan Polley PolleyRyan Polley is the Chief Product Officer at Kargo. In his role, Ryan is responsible for product strategy and delivery, leading the product and engineering teams at Kargo. With almost two decades of experience in the media industry, he started his career at RealNetworks and served as an executive at ComScore and Rubicon Project most recently. Today, Ryan’s passionate about enabling advertising technologies that allow brands to tell compelling stories. He’s a graduate of the University of Washington in Seattle and currently lives near San Francisco, CA.
Dwenne SaindoryDwenne is a graduate of Murray Koppelman School of Business. She earned her M.S focusing on Global Business and received her undergraduate degree in Marketing from York College. She is a fashion content creator, educator, and philanthropist.
Kevin SolingerAs Group VP, Product Management at Xandr, Kevin oversees the product platform supporting Xandr’s Invest and Monetize products, across both Digital and Linear TV. He previously led Xandr’s platform integration of enterprise data, supporting both the Media and Marketplace businesses with identity solutions, audience building, and attribution.
Having joined AppNexus in 2011 prior to its acquisition by AT&T and the launch of Xandr in 2018, Kevin has held a number of roles across the company in Product Architecture, Research and Development, and Product Management. He led the integration of viewability measurement technology into the AppNexus exchange, as well as the development of optimization and transaction-related features, for which he is co-inventor of two patents. Kevin has also served as product lead for partner integrations, reporting and analytics, and inventory quality.
Prior to AppNexus, Kevin was a Senior Engineer at the New York Stock Exchange, responsible for the development and management of mission-critical, low-latency market data platforms.
Kevin holds a Bachelor of Applied Science in Computer Science and a Bachelor of Arts in Economics from the University of Pennsylvania.
Katie StroudKatie Stroud is Senior Product Manager with IAB Tech Lab, currently managing products for improving ad experiences in ad tech. Katie has been working with IAB since 2011 on products for video, creative formatting, ad delivery, and rich media interactions in video and display. Nearly native to the Pacific Northwest, Katie enjoys the rain, long bike rides (sometimes at the same time), and finding ways to improve ad experiences for brands, publishers, and consumers.
David CohenDavid Cohen joined IAB in April 2020 as President and was named Chief Executive Officer in September 2020. Cohen is a widely respected advertising agency leader who, prior to IAB, served as President, North America for MAGNA, Interpublic Group’s (IPG) centralized media intelligence, investment, and innovation arm. In this role, Cohen was responsible for more than $20 billion in media spend. During his tenure, Cohen structured and executed large global transactions on behalf of IPG and its clients, with such major IAB member companies as Facebook, Google, Microsoft, Spotify, Twitter, and Verizon Media.
Prior to MAGNA, Cohen served as Chief Investment Officer of UM, ensuring that digital innovation, data, and technology acumen flowed throughout the agency to drive performance. From 2001 to 2011, Cohen served in critical, transformational roles at UM during the explosive growth of digital advertising, including Chief Media Officer, Chief Digital Officer, and Executive Vice President, U.S. Director of Digital Communications. In the late 1990’s, Cohen was responsible for launching and building IPG’s digital practice.
Cohen has a long history of working with trade organizations including IAB and 4As, where he served as chairman of the Interactive Marketing Committee from 2009-2013. He has also been instrumental in initiating several vital industry-wide programs, including the Future of Television, facilitated by EY. Cohen is a Queens native, with a bachelor’s degree in communications from Adelphi University. He was recognized by Adweek as a “Media All Star” and was part of the “Adweek 50” in 2012.
In 2016, David was elected to the Board of Directors of Partnership with Children a non-profit whose mission is to strengthen the emotional, social, and cognitive skills of vulnerable children in New York City to help them succeed in school, society, and life.
David enjoys spending time with his wife and two teenage daughters. A self-described gadget-geek and sometimes fitness fanatic – he ran the NYC Marathon in 2014 and 2019 and Boston Marathon in 2016.
David CohenDavid Cohen joined IAB in April 2020 as President and was named Chief Executive Officer in September 2020. Cohen is a widely respected advertising agency leader who, prior to IAB, served as President, North America for MAGNA, Interpublic Group’s (IPG) centralized media intelligence, investment, and innovation arm. In this role, Cohen was responsible for more than $20 billion in media spend. During his tenure, Cohen structured and executed large global transactions on behalf of IPG and its clients, with such major IAB member companies as Facebook, Google, Microsoft, Spotify, Twitter, and Verizon Media.
Prior to MAGNA, Cohen served as Chief Investment Officer of UM, ensuring that digital innovation, data, and technology acumen flowed throughout the agency to drive performance. From 2001 to 2011, Cohen served in critical, transformational roles at UM during the explosive growth of digital advertising, including Chief Media Officer, Chief Digital Officer, and Executive Vice President, U.S. Director of Digital Communications. In the late 1990’s, Cohen was responsible for launching and building IPG’s digital practice.
Cohen has a long history of working with trade organizations including IAB and 4As, where he served as chairman of the Interactive Marketing Committee from 2009-2013. He has also been instrumental in initiating several vital industry-wide programs, including the Future of Television, facilitated by EY. Cohen is a Queens native, with a bachelor’s degree in communications from Adelphi University. He was recognized by Adweek as a “Media All Star” and was part of the “Adweek 50” in 2012.
In 2016, David was elected to the Board of Directors of Partnership with Children a non-profit whose mission is to strengthen the emotional, social, and cognitive skills of vulnerable children in New York City to help them succeed in school, society, and life.
David enjoys spending time with his wife and two teenage daughters. A self-described gadget-geek and sometimes fitness fanatic – he ran the NYC Marathon in 2014 and 2019 and Boston Marathon in 2016.
Anthony KatsurAnthony Katsur is a media technology veteran with more than twenty-five years of executive leadership and technical experience at innovative technology companies in the digital media industry.
Most recently, Anthony was SVP, Strategy, Operations and Corporate Development at Nexstar Media Group, Inc., the largest local broadcaster in the United States. Anthony was responsible for overseeing strategy, technology platforms and corporate development across Nexstar’s portfolio of digital assets.
Prior to Nexstar, Anthony served as President of Sonobi, where he implemented their product and go to market strategy around people-based marketing. Anthony recruited, and led highly effective teams while driving strategic partnerships with leading media companies, agencies and brands.
Prior to Sonobi, Anthony held global leadership roles at Rubicon Project as EVP of Business Operations and General Manager of Buyer Cloud. He also held global executive roles at MediaMath and Maxifier, where he served as CEO. Earlier in his career, he joined DoubleClick via the acquisition of NetGravity where he lead multiple engineering divisions and also fulfilled several product leadership and general management roles.
Anthony is an active participant at industry conferences, speaking about the latest ends in advertising at the National Association of Broadcasters, AdAge’s Brand Summit, Advertising Week, Broadcasting & Cable, AdMonsters and GABBCON. He has been quoted on industry trends and provided thought leadership in The Wall Street Journal, AdAge, Adweek, AdExchanger, MediaPost, Econsultancy and Digiday, among others.
Michael LebowitzMichael Lebowitz is Founder and CEO of Big Spaceship, a globally-recognized marketing agency that creates connected experiences, products and services. Since launching the agency in 2000, he has defined the strategy and vision for Big Spaceship, while working closely with the agency’s clients, including BMW, Capital One, Google Play, Google Maps, Ken Burns, Nestle-Purina, Organic Valley, Samsung, West Elm, and YouTube.
At Big Spaceship Michael has assembled “a crack team of digital inventors,” according to Fast Company’s “Most Innovative Companies” list, and has led the company to be named one of Advertising Age and Crain’s New York Business Best Places to Work for multiple years in a row. Big Spaceship’s multidisciplinary team structure and progressive culture have been profiled by Harvard Business School, with the case study now taught at business schools in 40 countries.
Speaking on creativity, innovation and the evolution of business, Michael speaks across the globe and has engaged audiences at top industry events including Cannes Festival of Creativity, SXSW, Click:NY, Forge Conference, Advertising Week, Click:London and ad:tech, as well as at business schools including NYU Stern, Long Island University and SLU’s Institute for Private Business.
He frequently chairs and sits on juries for creative awards and influential industry organizations including the IAB Agency Advisory Board and annual MIXX Awards, The One Club, Society of Digital Agencies and The International Academy of Digital Arts & Sciences, among others. And has led the agency to win countless awards of its own including an Emmy Award nomination for the agency’s work with HBO Voyeur, Cannes Lions, Clios, Webbys, Andys, and One Show Interactive Pencils, as well as numerous IAB MIXX, Webby, Shorty, FWA, Communication Arts, W3 and Pixel Awards, among others. Michael was also named among the 2010 Creativity 50 and the 2008 OMMA Online All-Stars.
Orchid RichardsonOrchid Richardson serves as the newly appointed Vice President and Managing Director, IAB Programmatic+Data Center. She is charged with driving the Center’s mission to define boundaries, reduce friction, and increase value along the data supply chain, for consumers, marketers, and the ecosystem that supports them.
Before joining the IAB Data Center, Orchid was General Manager of Publisher & Media Solutions for 33Across, Inc. where she was responsible for leading the global business strategy & development for both the company’s growth and the growth of their publisher partners. Her successes include leading the development and integration of the 33Across Real Platform with over 250 demand partner, developing a product suite that was the catalyst for the company’s pivot into programmatic and launching the Real Platform in 12 countries located in EMEA, LATAM and North America.
Orchid also served as Head of Digital Operations for Hearst Magazines Digital Media. There, she was responsible for architecting the Hearst Audience Exchange that represented the consolidation of Hearst’s audience data for multiple Hearst corporate units including Magazines, Newspaper, Entertainment, and Broadcast on to one platform for strategic company-wide initiatives.
Before Hearst, Orchid was Senior Director of Advertising Operations & Strategy for BET Networks within the Digital Group. Orchid has also served in management roles at other leading digital companies including Everyday Health, Singer Direct (an Omnicom Media Group Company) and Multimedia Solutions.
Orchid is actively involved in the advertising community, having held leadership roles in key industry trade organizations. Additionally, she is an active member of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc., the Metro-Manhattan (NY) Chapter of the Links, Incorporated and the Westchester Chapter of Jack & Jill of America. Orchid also serves as a board member and fundraising chair of the Ujamaa Community Development Corporation which has built over $100 million in affordable housing in Westchester County, New York.
She is an alumna of Spelman College and New York University’s Stern School of Business where she holds a degree in Business Administration & International Business.
A citizen of the world having visited over 30 countries, Orchid is based in New York where she lives with her husband, Eugene Uzamere, Esq. and their children, Owen, Addison, Ivie, Eki, and Nosa.
Zoe SoonZoe Soon has 10+ years of experience building products in technology-driven businesses with a heavy focus on mobile. Six years ago Zoe flew 21 hours from Sydney to NYC for a 30min coffee meeting which led to her first job in NYC. Since then she’s worked with three major New York based media companies, The New York Times, Condé Nast and Business Insider on projects ranging from location-based apps to paywalls. Zoe began her career as a user researcher and UX design consultant working with three of the top five banks in Australia. She was then hired to establish a user insights practice at Fairfax Media, a leading Australian news and media conglomerate. Here she led the user research for the flagship news apps which won Best Mobile News Product at the 2012 Australian Mobile Awards and went on to become product lead for the news sites. In this role she launched a content paywall and a unified user data system to diversify revenue and enable more targeted marketing.
Prior to joining the IAB Zoe was General Manager of apps and email at Business Insider where she was charged with defining the go-to market strategy for these platforms. In this role Zoe launched Insider Inc’s first OTT apps across Apple, Amazon Fire and Roku offering advertisers cross-platform video digital distribution and access to an audience that generates over 2 billion views each month.
Zoe has a Masters in Organizational Psychology and lives in New York. She enjoys burning pancakes, Cuban salsa dancing and talking to strangers in line.
Krishan BhatiaKrishan Bhatia serves as President & Chief Business Officer for NBCUniversal’s Advertising Sales division, reporting to Linda Yaccarino, Chairman, Global Advertising & Partnerships. Bhatia, with the help of his 500-person team, oversees Digital & Advanced Advertising Sales as well as the division’s One Platform Strategy, Partnerships, Product, Technology, Measurement and Operations functions — spanning a portfolio of TV, streaming and digital assets that reaches 230 Million viewers every month, including the company’s ad-supported streaming platform Peacock.
In 2021, Bhatia launched the company’s Enterprise Data unit to develop NBCUnified, the first-party data platform that serves NBCUniversal’s entire portfolio – including all TV & streaming properties, the NBC News Group, Universal Filmed Entertainment and Universal Parks & Resorts.
Bhatia also manages the corporate partnerships with Comcast Advertising, Freewheel and Sky Media, as well NBCU’s advertising partnerships with Amazon, Apple, Google/YouTube, Roku, Snap, The Trade Desk, TikTok, Twitter and others.
Bhatia took on his role at NBCUniversal after Comcast acquired the company in 2011 and led the integration of the two companies’ advertising businesses. He joined Comcast in 2005 as a founding executive team member of Comcast Interactive Media, where he played an instrumental role in creating and growing the digital media business for Comcast through acquisitions and partnerships.
Prior to Comcast, Bhatia was a Principal with Booz Allen Hamilton’s Global Media & Entertainment Practice in New York, advising many of the world’s leading media and technology companies.
Bhatia serves as chairman of the IAB and a board member of OpenAP.
Pooja MidhaPooja Midha is President of true[X], the most effective engagement advertising platform for on-demand, interactive media, leading the company’s daily operations and long-term strategy. As President, her mission is to grow true[X]’s roster of advertiser and premium publisher partnerships; expand its industry-leading ad products to create value for consumers, advertisers, and media companies; and further true[X]’s active role as an advocate for high-quality, measurable advertising across platforms.
Pooja most recently spent more than five years as senior vice president of digital ad sales and operations for the ABC Television Network, where she oversaw sales, strategy, and revenue operations for all of ABC’s digital properties — the ABC app, abc.com, abcnews.com, GMA on Yahoo, ABC on Hulu, Oscars digital, all ABC dynamically ad-served set top box video on demand, and all social and new media platforms. Pooja previously had worked for ten years at Viacom Media Networks, including serving as senior vice president of digital ad sales for the Music and Entertainment Group.
Pooja currently serves as vice chair of the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB) Video Board, co-chair of the IAB Long Form Video Committee, and is a member of the IAB CRO Council. Pooja also serves as a member of the Upstream Seller Forum Advisory Board. She holds a B.A. from Lehigh University and an MBA from Columbia Business School. She has also completed the National Association of Multi-Ethnicity in Communications (NAMIC) Executive Leadership Development Program from UCLA’s Anderson School of Management.
Pooja currently resides in New York City with her husband, Allan Beaufour.
Randall RothenbergRandall Rothenberg is the Executive Chair of the Interactive Advertising Bureau, the trade association for digital media and marketing in the United States. Among the IAB’s 750 member companies are such major platforms as Google, Facebook, Microsoft, and Snap; the nation’s most important ad-supported media companies, including The New York Times, Walt Disney Co., NBC Universal, ViacomCBS, Hearst Magazines, Spotify, Verizon Media, Hulu, Warner Media, LinkedIn, and Meredith; incumbent and disruptor brands, including Coca-Cola, Walmart, Procter & Gamble, Hubble Contacts, ThirdLove, General Motors, Johnson & Johnson, and Citigroup; and scores of technology and data companies, among them Mediamath, LiveRamp, Quantcast, and Pubmatic.
With these members and its 47 affiliate associations on every inhabited continent, the IAB and its sister technology-standards group, the IAB Tech Lab, serve as the digital marketing industry’s public policy and lobbying organization, market and consumer research center, training and development base, and hub for the development of standards and best practices.
Mr. Rothenberg joined the IAB in January 2007 as President and Chief Executive Officer, and led the organization until becoming Executive Chair in September 2020. During his tenure, the organization became one of the largest and most influential media and marketing trade bodies in the world, helping to develop technical standards, self-regulation, government regulation, market and consumer research, and professional development programs to protect consumer privacy, foster brand and media revenue growth, improve data security, and reduce supply chain friction in the digital marketing industry.
Prior to his IAB role, Mr. Rothenberg was the Chief Marketing Officer and Senior Director of Intellectual Capital at Booz Allen Hamilton, the international strategy and technology consulting firm, where he oversaw business development, knowledge management, and thought leadership activities, and directed the award-winning quarterly business magazine strategy+business, Strategy+Business Books, www.strategy-business.com, and other electronic and print publications for senior business executives.
Earlier in his career, Mr. Rothenberg spent six years at The New York Times, where he was the technology editor and politics editor of the Sunday magazine, the daily advertising columnist, and a media and marketing reporter. For 10 years, he was a marketing and media columnist for Advertising Age. Mr. Rothenberg has written for a score of major national magazines, among them Esquire, GQ, The Nation, The New York Times Magazine, and New York Magazine. He is the author of four books, including Where the Suckers Moon: An Advertising Story (Alfred A. Knopf, 1994), a critically-acclaimed chronicle of the birth, evolution, and death of a single advertising campaign.
Mr. Rothenberg, an avid nature, urban, and portrait photographer, serves on the Board of Directors of the International Center of Photography and the Board of Overseers of the Columbia Journalism Review. He received an undergraduate degree in Classics from Princeton and lives in New York City.
Alysia BorsaAlysia Borsa is President of Meredith Digital of Meredith Corporation’s National Media Group, the leading multi-platform media company focused on women – reaching 95% of all U.S. women and more than 190 million unduplicated American consumers every month. Borsa oversees all digital strategy, content, products, technology, sales, marketing, e-commerce and operations for the company’s 40+ iconic brands, including PEOPLE, Better Homes & Gardens, Allrecipes, Southern Living and REAL SIMPLE.
Since joining Meredith a decade ago, Borsa has served in several executive roles, including EVP/Chief Data Officer, Chief Business Officer and Chief Marketing Officer. Her distinguished record and forward-thinking approach have been instrumental in Meredith achieving many key milestones, including the establishment of the Meredith Data Studio. This suite of advertising solutions leverages the company’s rich, proprietary first-party data and predictive insights capabilities, helping to inform its partners’ marketing, product and business strategies. Under Borsa’s leadership, Meredith has also expanded its business partnerships with a wide array of retailers and blue chip marketers.
Prior to Meredith, Borsa held senior positions in the technology, telecommunications and consulting sectors. She worked at Nokia, Comcast and Accenture, developing and executing strategies to grow new and legacy businesses.
Borsa serves on the ANA’s Data & Technology Growth Council and the boards of directors of the Interactive Advertising Bureau; AdLedger, an industry blockchain trade group; and 4-H, a nonprofit youth development organization.
Alia AbbasAlia Abbas is a strategy and operations executive with extensive global digital transformation experience supporting Fortune 500 companies across various sectors and geographies driving organizational effectiveness and alignment and overcoming and embracing market disruptions. Her expertise in strategic planning, operational excellence, and program and change management, coupled with her broad background and strong cross-functional experience has exposed her to a wide range of business situations, challenges, and workstyles over her two- decade career.
Most recently, Alia was the Head of Business Operations for the technology organization at The Estee Lauder Companies where she collaborated across global leadership teams and the broader organization to facilitate and develop their digital transformation strategy and operating model, and simplify, digitize, and integrate core business processes as ELC embarked on their digital customer experience transformation. Prior to that, Alia led the strategic planning and execution of Time Warner’s unprecedented enterprise-wide strategic and operational transformation efforts in support of the company’s digital initiatives.
She holds an MBA from Cornell University’s S.C. Johnson Graduate School of Management, an MS from Stevens Institute of Technology in Management Information Systems, and a BS in Computer Science from Drexel University. Alia is on the Board of Advisor’s at Seton Hall University’s Skillman School of Business Customer Experience Program, and on the Board of Trustees and DEI committee of Trailblazers Camp, a nonprofit that empowers youth to build life values through outdoor experiential programs. Alia is a native New York-er and avid traveler.
Sheryl GoldsteinA “net vet” with 20+ years of driving meaningful revenue through insights into action consultative selling in the dynamic digital landscape (Yahoo, AOL, About.com). Adept at building successful sales teams, developing go-to-market sales strategies and gaining consensus across company divisions. Experience includes mobile, tech (DSP, PMP, Exchange) and data driven solutions, social media and word of mouth marketing, Website development and design, online media and marketing and cross-platform media experience (TV, Radio and live-event). A passionate leader and relationship builder who is committed to exceeding goals and expectations for clients, her team and company.
Michael HahnMichael Hahn is Executive Vice President & General Counsel at IAB and IAB Tech Lab. Michael has responsibility for all legal matters, including the direction of legal strategy, privacy compliance, antitrust compliance, intellectual property rights issues, and general corporate matters. Michael is also responsible for serving as an advocate for the digital advertising industry on common legal issues affecting member companies.
Michael joined IAB and IAB Tech Lab from Lowenstein Sandler LLP where he served as Vice Chair of the firm’s Antitrust Practice Group. In that role, he provided clients with strategic counsel around competition, distribution and governance issues. In the area of litigation, Michael’s matters have included multiparty class action antitrust defense representation.
Michael served previously as Co-Chair of the New Jersey State Bar Association Antitrust Law Committee. He also previously served on the Editorial Advisory Board of Competition Law 360 and the Advisory Board of the American Bar Association Antitrust Section’s Civil Torts & RICO Committee. Michael frequently publishes on a range of legal and policy issues.
Michael earned his B.A. in History and Political Science from Rutgers University, M.P.P. from Georgetown University and J.D. for Georgetown University Law Center.
Carryl Pierre-DrewsCarryl Pierre-Drews is EVP, Chief Marketing Officer at the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB) where she is responsible for providing executive leadership and management of the IAB marketing and communications organization and activities to forward the IAB’s position as a digital, marketing, and media industry thought leader and agenda-setter. Carryl has stewardship of the IAB Brand inclusive of Events, Marketing, PR, Digital, Social, Mobile, Video, and Audio channels with the goal of elevating IAB’s profile with media and tech CEOs, CMOs, and the marketing and advertising industry at large.
Previously, Carryl held the title of Vice President of Marketing at Fullscreen, a next-gen social marketing agency, where she built and led the agency’s brand marketing, PR, digital/social channels, influencer engagements, and global industry activations featuring marketers from American Eagle, AT&T, HP, Marriott, Mars, Mattel, Visa and more. Carryl was instrumental in catalyzing key strategic decisions that drove business growth, elevated visibility, and increased shareholder value positioning Fullscreen for the AT&T acquisition in 2018 and eventual WarnerMedia integration in 2019. Prior to Fullscreen, Carryl was Senior Vice President of Strategic Marketing at USA Network, a division of NBCUniversal, where she led the integrated marketing, communications strategy, and client experiences teams.
Carryl serves as Chair of the Marketing & Communications Committee of Pet Partners Board of Directors, where she helps devise strategies to further communicate and expand the vital role of therapy animals in our lives. As a therapy animal team with her dog Mika, Carryl has seen firsthand the effect therapy animals have on overall health and well-being. Carryl is also passionate about creating a culture of inclusion and diversity in the advertising, marketing, and media industry and has been an active member of She Runs It, an organization invested in women’s achievement, for 19 years, with six spent on the Board (2012-2018). She was honored twice by CableFax Magazine as one of the most influential minorities in cable — in 2013 “The Leaders” and in 2012 “The Influentials.” In 2019 Carryl was nominated and became a founding member of Chief, a private network focused on connecting and supporting women leaders.
Lartease TiffithLartease Tiffith is the Executive Vice President for Public Policy at the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB). He leads IAB’s public policy team, which is responsible for advocating on behalf of IAB’s more than 700 member companies on complex issues, including consumer privacy, data security, global trade, international data transfer rules, and more. Lartease also leads IAB’s Public Policy Council, the marketing and media industry’s largest legislative and regulatory advisory group, with senior executives from more than 200 companies contributing to solutions to advance consumer benefits and economic growth. He also plays an important role in supporting IAB Tech Labs’ efforts to align the industry’s technical development and best practices.
Lartease joined IAB from Amazon, where he led the company’s public policy work around advertising, privacy, security, data governance, cross-border data flows, and consumer protection issues. In his role, he provided counsel to internal legal and business partners on global public policy matters to help guide the development of products, services, and internal policies. During his tenure at Amazon, INSIDER named him as one of the key players in politics and the tech world.
Prior to joining Amazon, Lartease served as Senior Counsel to then-U.S. Senator Kamala Harris, and Counsel to U.S. Senator Dianne Feinstein. Before working in the Senate, he practiced law at two international law firms (Kirkland & Ellis LLP and O’Melveny & Myers LLP) and the U.S. Department of Justice. Lartease began his legal career as a Law Clerk to the Honorable Roger L. Gregory, Circuit Judge, on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit.
Lartease earned his B.A., J.D., and M.B.A. from Northwestern University.
Jeanie CarstensenJeanie Carstensen is the Senior Vice President, Finance and Operations of Finance and Operations. She joined the IAB in October 2015 with 20+ years experience in the media and entertainment industries. Most recently she was with Comcast/NBCUniversal as a strategic finance and administration leader supporting the Cable Ad Sales Division. Prior to that she held finance leadership roles at Viacom/MTV Networks in New York and MTV Europe in London, England.
Jeanie holds a BA in Finance from Iona College, is an avid traveler, and volunteers with Monday Night Hospitality serving restaurant style meals to those in need.
Rick BergerRick has significant experience across all sides of the marketing ecosystem including brand management, agency, media, digital, ad tech, data, analytics, and attribution. He started his career working on blue chip brands for several major NY ad agencies and then transitioned to the brand side at L’Oreal. After a successful stint launching and managing haircare brands, Rick took on a role running sales for Next Generation Radio, an industry association charged with generating new on-air and digital revenue. In nine years, NGR generated over $125M in new sales to the industry. After leaving NGR, Rick ran the NY Sales office for Alloy, helping to launch the largest teen ad network. Rick has also run sales teams at Music Mogul (a music start-up), Interactive One (a multi-cultural publisher), Specific Media/Viant (the largest ad network) and inPowered (a native platform). Most recently, Rick has been with Conversant, the identity platform and digital arm of Epsilon. In this role, Rick has been the lead revenue generator for Conversant’s emerging Restaurant segment.
Craig ColemanCraig Coleman joins IAB with over 15 years of expertise developing marketing programs, messaging, and positioning strategies for IAB member brands such as USA TODAY, NBCUniversal, and MTV. He is excited to raise the profile of the IAB brand and positioning IAB as the industry thought leader in media and marketing.
Most recently, Coleman was VP, Client Solutions and Product Marketing for Gannett Digital and USA TODAY where he led digital product marketing and client solutions. Under his leadership, USA TODAY launched the award winning Gravity unit and introduced digital partnerships in virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR).
In previous roles, Coleman served as Vice President, Marketing for Screenvision where he launched a new branded content offering combining media, movie studio and partner assets. While at NBCUniversal, he was brand manager of the lifestyle brands Green is Universal, Healthy at NBCU and Hispanics at NBCU and oversaw the development and implementation of integrated ad sales marketing programs for advertisers across NBCUniversal’s portfolio including the first-ever movie studio program with Sony. Prior to joining NBCUniversal in 2010, Coleman directed all marketing and communications for the fastest growing kid’s network, Nicktoons Network. Coleman also co-produced the Nicktoons Network Animation Festival driving festival submissions and partnerships with LEGO, Addicting Games and mtvU making it the largest animation festival in North America.
Coleman earned a Bachelor’s degree from University of Connecticut, and currently resides in CT with his wife, Evan, and daughter, Bennett.
Libby MorganLibby Morgan comes to IAB with over twenty years of agency and consulting experience, spending most of her career at the intersection of Marketing, Technology and Innovation. Most recently, she served as the Global President of MRM Commerce, where she launched the Strategy, Consulting, and Digital Transformation practice. Previous positions also include President of The Born Group, where she focused on Digital Marketing, Commerce and Content, and Managing Director of iCrossing (part of Hearst), where she focused on Media and Digital Marketing. Throughout her career, she has had the good fortune to partner with clients such as Nestle, General Motors, Anheuser Busch, American Express, and Geico, among others, to help them achieve their business goals through interactive solutions.
Shailley SinghShailley brings several years of product management experience in Digital advertising at Yahoo and Say Media building products for Mobile advertising, Ad Operations, Targeting solutions and integrating data platforms. Shailley has supported and worked with multiple IAB initiatives in the past namely MRAID and Mobile Rising Stars specifications. At Yahoo, he worked on creating innovative ad experiences for mobile and tablet platforms as well as native formats. Shailley has a diverse background as a product leader, consultant and entrepreneur building and sustaining high performing teams at both large organizations as well as venture funded startups like Paypal, Yahoo, Say Media, Serus, Accenture, PwC. By way of qualifications, Shailley has an MBA and Chemical engineering degree.
Alexandra SalomonAlexandra Salomon joined the IAB Tech Lab in 2018 to lead global business development efforts for the organization, spearheading growth around the world and across the value chain. After heading up International for the Interactive Advertising Bureau for 5 years, she brings more than 25 years of business development and global marketing experience to the team, including two decades specifically in Digital.
A veteran in online advertising and interactive marketing, Salomon has worked for leading brands such as AOL, Yahoo, Zinio, and Disney Publishing. She was born in the U.K, grew up in France, and is not only multi-lingual but truly multicultural.
Angelina EngA seasoned executive with 24+ years of digital media, marketing and operations experience, Angelina Eng has focused her career on supporting agencies and brands to define, build and manage digital media and marketing efforts while enabling teams to operationally work efficiently and effectively with both internal and external partners and platforms. She’s been responsible for the development and management of internal systems and workflow, establishment of deliverable standards, designing ad trafficking and tracking guidelines, implementation of emerging platforms, as well as establishing best practices at companies such as Morgan Stanley, Merkle, Dentsu Aegis and Publicis Modem.
Over the years, She has been involved with multiple organizations and events to help define, establish and advocate some of the industry standards that we see in today’s digital media ecosystem (such as ad verification/brand safety, ad fraud, viewability and programmatic, social, etc)Angelina has been awarded the AdMonsters 2018 Power List, IAB Data Rockstar 2016 and AdMonsters Digital Media Leadership Award 2016.
Amber MuratAmber is the Vice President of Human Resources for IAB. She stepped into the role in May 2022 and has oversight of the organization’s human resource functions, including culture, diversity, inclusion, and all people-focused initiatives.
Amber is an Equity Designer, People Strategist, and an Authentic People & Culture leader. Amber joins IAB with 15 years of experience; in Human Resources leadership roles within nonprofit, mission-driven organizations. She brings a unique mix of human resources, executive coaching, and thought leadership expertise.
Most recently, Amber was the Head of People & Culture at Sollis Health, where she launched the company’s first-ever human resources strategy and led the organization through a culture transformation. She holds a master’s degree in Human Resources Development from Fordham University, a senior professional human resources designation, and multiple professional coaching certifications from iPEC & IIN. In 2020, Disruptor Magazine named Amber one of the Top 30 Life Coaches to Look Out For in 2021.
Eric JohnEric John leads IAB’s Media Center, a dedicated unit within the IAB whose mission is to simplify the video supply chain, providing best practices and education for brands, agencies, and media companies to drive continued growth through the evolving convergence of television and digital video. Eric drives the center’s efforts in the development of market-making research, industry standards and best practices and buyer/seller terms and conditions. Before joining the IAB, Eric led digital services and strategy at the Alliance for Audited Media and the MPA. Eric also served as global director of publisher marketing at Nokia, managing the company’s world-wide mobile app developer ecosystem. Prior to Nokia, Eric launched and led advertiser brand engagement solutions for Yahoo!, creating advanced, data-driven video, mobile and interactive campaigns for brands such as Pepsi, Loreal and Nikon. Eric began his career in internet advertising at DoubleClick (Google) where he served in business and product development within the DART for Publishers (DFP) and DART for Advertisers (DFA) business units where he launched the industry’s first post-click “Spotlight” measurement tools. Eric is an alumnus of Miami of Ohio (BA) and Indiana University (MA) and is a graduate of Columbia University’s Product Management Program.
Read articles by Eric John.
Zoe SoonZoe Soon has 10+ years of experience building products in technology-driven businesses with a heavy focus on mobile. Six years ago Zoe flew 21 hours from Sydney to NYC for a 30min coffee meeting which led to her first job in NYC. Since then she’s worked with three major New York based media companies, The New York Times, Condé Nast and Business Insider on projects ranging from location-based apps to paywalls. Zoe began her career as a user researcher and UX design consultant working with three of the top five banks in Australia. She was then hired to establish a user insights practice at Fairfax Media, a leading Australian news and media conglomerate. Here she led the user research for the flagship news apps which won Best Mobile News Product at the 2012 Australian Mobile Awards and went on to become product lead for the news sites. In this role she launched a content paywall and a unified user data system to diversify revenue and enable more targeted marketing.
Prior to joining the IAB Zoe was General Manager of apps and email at Business Insider where she was charged with defining the go-to market strategy for these platforms. In this role Zoe launched Insider Inc’s first OTT apps across Apple, Amazon Fire and Roku offering advertisers cross-platform video digital distribution and access to an audience that generates over 2 billion views each month.
Zoe has a Masters in Organizational Psychology and lives in New York. She enjoys burning pancakes, Cuban salsa dancing and talking to strangers in line.
Chris BruderleChris Bruderle brings over 20 years of experience in Data/Web Analytics and Media Market Research at premium Digital and Muti-Platform web publishers including The Daily Beast, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, Conde Nast Publications and This Old House Ventures.
Most recently, Chris was VP, Analytics & Research at The Daily Beast where he spent nearly 7 years and was responsible for the tracking, analysis and reporting of The Daily Beast’s O&O site and off-platform data/analytics for Senior/Corporate Management, Editorial, Advertising Sales, Product/Engineering, Audience/Business Development, Social Media and PR. He established the company-wide Editorial Analytics and Advertising Sales data and research stacks which included, among others, Google Analytics, Parse.ly, Krux DMP, Optimizely, comScore, Kantar, Samba, Newswhip, Crowd Tangle, Buzzsumo, and CrazyEgg.
Prior to The Daily Beast, Chris spent 5 years as Associate and Acting Director at Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia where he directed the correspondence and development of all research-based strategies supporting the Advertising Sales and Marketing staffs of each of the MSLO media brands and platforms across digital, mobile/tablet, TV, print and radio.
Chris started his career at BBDO as an Assistant Media Planner where he most notably completed the “Media Training Program”.
Chris earned a Bachelor’s of Arts in English and Communications from Fairfield University in Fairfield, Connecticut.
Alex ConeAlex joined Tech Lab in early 2020 after 7 years at Xandr (formerly AppNexus) where he lead multiple product and engineering groups to deliver a broad range of successful ad tech products. Alex stood up Xandr’s Privacy product and engineering capability in 2018 and since realized digital privacy is the area of advertising where he can make the most impact to the industry and consumers. Alex believes Tech Lab–with its global reach, technology focus, diverse membership and trade group relationships–is uniquely positioned as a place where he can leave a positive lasting mark on privacy.
Conor HealyJessalin LamJessalin Lam is a learning and development leader, DEI champion, and mentor with over 10 years of combined experience across L&D, DEI, marketing, partnerships, business development, and consulting. Jessalin is a lifelong learner and connector who loves to cultivate learning cultures and empower people to thrive and seize their potential with a growth mindset.
Jessalin joined IAB from TBWA\Worldwide, where she was the Precision Marketing Academy Director for the Nissan account leading a global employee training program across the agency and client. Prior to that, she worked at the American Association of Advertising Agencies (4A’s), where she consulted with agency HR partners and leaders to help them develop their talent from entry-level to executive level across various trainings.
In 2021, Jessalin was elected to the Association for Talent Development NYC Board of Directors. She is also the Co-Founder of Asians in Advertising, a community focused on creating opportunities for Asians and elevating them to higher leadership positions.
Rachel McEnerneyOver the course of her 15 year career, Rachel has had the honor of working at some of the most respected companies in the industry. Getting her start at Edelman PR, she focused primarily on forging and executing media and content partnerships with broadcast and digital properties on behalf of clients. Her subsequent roles supporting cable ad sales at NBCUniversal and the CNÉ sales team at Condé Nast fully immersed her in the world of digital media and sales marketing and set her up for success when she joined Vevo to lead their Ad Sales Marketing team. During her five years with the music video platform, Rachel was a respected leader within the sales organization and focused her efforts on innovating strategic solutions for client partners and crafting complex go-to-market products and narratives in support of Vevo’s global salesforce.
Michael TexidorBrendan ThomasBrendan is IAB’s Vice President of Policy Communications, helping to create greater awareness among policy makers and the press of digital advertising’s importance to technological and economic progress, creativity, and the ad-supported internet.
He works closely with IAB’s legal and public policy experts, as well as more than 700 IAB members, to enhance public understanding of digital marketing and advertising’s value to small businesses and their customers, and the industry’s innovations to online commerce, personal data protection and privacy, and more.
Prior to joining IAB, Brendan directed policy communications for members of Congress and for a major trade association. A graduate of Northwestern University, he received his Master’s Degree from University of Southern California and worked as a reporter and producer in the news and entertainment industries in New York and Los Angeles.
Benjamin DickBen is Director, Data & Ad Effectiveness within IAB’s Data Center of Excellence. He leads IAB projects within its automation, identity, measurement/attribution groups, and works with leading ad technologists, agencies and publishers to identify and navigate some of the most pressing opportunities and challenges within these verticals. By developing best practices, research, white papers, and thought leadership in collaboration with IAB members, Ben helps improve and facilitate digital media buying and selling via automated tools, software and data.
Prior to joining the IAB, Ben was Associate Director, Digital Trading at GroupM where he oversaw programmatic strategy, measurement / optimization, ad operations, and private marketplace relationships across Nestlé 85 brand US portfolio. In this capacity he was responsible for building and “productizing” the Nestlé Trade Desk (NTD), an independent programmatic buying unit developed specifically to service Nestle brands. Prior to his work on Nestlé, Ben held positions at both Maxus Global and Universal McCann where he helped lead the development of programmatic and measurement/attribution strategies for large global brands including MasterCard, Barclays, Harvard Business School, and Welch’s.
Ben received a B.S. in Communications and Entrepreneurship from the S.I. Newhouse School of Public Communications at Syracuse University and resides in Brooklyn, NY.
John GriffertyErick HarrisErick currently serves as Legislative Director and Senior Counsel to Congressman Steve Chabot (OH). In addition to handling the judiciary portfolio, Erick focuses on financial services, tax, labor, and technology issues. Erick formerly served as Legislative Counsel to Congresswoman Emerson (MO) and as an aide to Senator Jim Talent (MO) and at the U.S. Department of Justice in the Office of the Solicitor General.
While completing his law degree, Erick served on the Wiley Rutledge Moot Court Board and as Senior Editor of the Washington University Jurisprudence Review. He appeared on various media outlets to discuss the 2008 Presidential election.
Erick received his Juris Doctor from Washington University in St. Louis, School of Law and his Bachelor of Science Degree from Vanderbilt University in Political Science and Human and Organizational Development with a concentration on Public Policy. While studying at Vanderbilt, Erick served on the Honor Council and completed internships with the U.S. House of Representatives, the U.S. Senate, the British House of Commons, and at the White House.
Erick is originally from Cape Girardeau, Missouri and he and his wife, Bridgette currently reside in Washington D.C with their miniature goldendoodle, Vandy.
Nicole HorsfordNicole joins the IAB as Senior Manager in the Member Services department. In this role she strategically engages and recruits IAB membership through the creation of our many offerings and events. Nicole draws from her wealth of industry experience both on the buy side, having worked for Saatchi and Saatchi, and on the sell side at Oddcast and Westwood One. Her natural curiosity and desire to learn the industry also landed her experience client side, working as a Marketing Manager for Emblem Health. Nicole graduated from Fordham University with a BA in Communications & Media Studies, as well as a business degree. Her latest curiosity is travel, and when not working she tries to discover as many new places as possible.
Deleela JonesDeleela Jones was most recently head of B2B marketing at Live Nation Entertainment where she was responsible for building Live Nation’s value proposition to advertisers and promoting the brand’s thought-leadership.
Prior to joining Live Nation, Deleela was Senior Director of Industry & Agency Marketing at Pandora Media where she led strategy, planning and execution of Pandora’s high impact industry events and agency programs.
Throughout her professional career, Deleela has held marketing leadership positions at some of the biggest media brands in the world, including USA TODAY/Gannett, Yahoo! and Univision Communications. She is known for helping to drive revenue for high-performing sales organizations and the ability to forge strategic partnerships.
Deleela earned an M.B.A. in marketing from Baruch College in NYC and a Bachelor of Arts with Distinction in telecommunications from Penn State University.
Kathleen McKayKathleen has been the Event Director at IAB since 2018. In this role, she and the events team are responsible for all the behind-the-scenes magic that bring an event to life. Prior to joining IAB, Kathleen worked for over 10 years in the meeting and events industry. Most recently as the Senior Manager, Special Event for the David Lynch Foundation and the Event Director at IQPC, a leading conference company.
In her spare time, she loves to travel, explore the NYC/Hoboken restaurant scene, go on brewery tours, binge watch Law & Order, and spend time with her boyfriend and nieces.
Kathleen received her Bachelors of Science from James Madison University and currently resides in Hoboken, NJ.
Mayank MishraMayank is a visionary technologist, bringing several years of thoughtful leadership in all stages of technology design, development, execution in support of a product vision and road-map with experience from large corporations to early startups adept in conceiving, defining, developing, & launching Web & mobile applications.
He has designed system software, Middleware, eCommerce and Mobile platform/apps for Fortune 50 corporations to startups for companies like IBM, Appssavvy,Kickapps and Flurry.
With certifications like PMI, Java/J2EE, Business Rules and also being speaker at developer conferences, he loves learning new technology and designing platforms.
With several mobile apps in app store and SDK’s running on thousand of devices, he loves to spend time in building mobile and wearable apps or playing guitar.
Nicole PellegrinoNicole Pellegrino joins the IAB most recently from Outbrain where she worked with leading publishers to monetize and diversify revenue streams. Prior to Outbrain, Nicole held various roles at InStyle, Conde Nast, VEVO and Specific Media/VIANT where she focused her time collaborating with brands to create multi-platform solutions and branded content programs. With a foundation in strategic planning/buying, Nicole is passionate about media and the world of interactive marketing.
Outside of the office you can find Nicole spending time with her husband and beautiful daughter, cooking a delicious Italian meal or enjoying an 80s Peloton ride.
Joe PillaJoe Pilla joined IAB in Summer of 2018 as Director, Data & Automation within the IAB Programmatic+Data Center. In his role, Joe works closely with Orchid Richardson, VP, Managing Director on a variety of projects related to data transparency, attribution modeling and the changing consumer experience.
Joe brings a wealth of diverse media experience to IAB from his accomplished career in advertising research and consumer insights. Previously, Joe was Vice President, Social Insights at Zenith Media where he led the Social Intelligence practice providing clients with data analysis related to their brand environment, online conversation and campaign performance. Joe spearheaded several agency thought leadership initiatives covering a wide spectrum of topics including brand integrations, the rise of Influencer Marketing, shifts in consumer behavior, and the relationship between televised tent pole events and Social Media channels.
Prior to Zenith, Joe was the Associate Director of Media & Consumer Insights at Mindshare where he led the adoption of The Loop, the agency’s global operating system linking real-time multimedia insights to real-time actions. Naturally curious, Joe excelled at developing the annual US Consumer Trends presenting the agency perspective to clients nationwide. Before making a move to the agency world, Joe honed his storytelling expertise at Condè Nast, Meredith Corporation and Reader’s Digest where he mastered syndicated research bringing the magazine consumer to life.
Joe earned a Bachelor’s of Science in Marketing from Rutgers University. He lives in Long Island City with his husband Kevin Davis, AIA. Joe sits on the board of SuperCommunityLIC, a local organization celebrating the local community while finding ways to give back. In his spare time, Joe produces his YouTube Channel “Pop Culture Monger” dedicated to the latest entertainment news with the tagline nonsense to follow.
Soizic SacrezJill WittkoppJill Wittkopp is Senior Director of Management at the IAB Tech Lab, a global consortium for technical standards in the digital advertising industry. Prior to joining the IAB Tech Lab, Jill worked on the buy side of programmatic advertising with companies like MyBuys, Magnetic and Rakuten. She has a B.A. in English from the University of Michigan, Dearborn and lives in San Francisco, California.
Jarrett WoldJarrett Wold comes to the IAB Tech Lab with a diverse background in technology leading teams focused on digital applications. His most recent role was Director of Technology and Platforms at Ad-ID, where he was overseeing Ad-ID’s technology endeavors and focusing on industry standards for the advertising ecosystem. His former role as Director of Technology includes Ad-ID, Rodale, Inc. and HealthiNation. He also worked at AOL on AOL Video, AOL Search, and Moviefone. He graduated from Syracuse University and is a huge Orange fan!Luz BritoCameron BurnhamCameron is a pioneer of the digital media industry having worked at iconic industry brands like Yahoo!, News Corp, and Twitter.
For the last 20 years, his career has spanned across sales, strategic partnerships, business development, and sales management roles with a consultative approach that’s delivered trusted and value-driven partnerships.
His industry experience runs across Digital Display, Video/OTT, Social, DOOH, Programmatic, and SaaS. Most recently, Cameron has focused his work around deterministic, people-based, activation’s and omni-channel attribution initiatives with the purpose of providing incremental revenue and scaling wanted business impact.
A passionate industry professional and relationship builder who is committed to exceeding goals and expectations for partners, his team and company.
Rowena LamRowena brings years of experience in product development of ad-supported casual games on mobile and web. Most recently, she led product at Jump Ramp Games where she was responsible for the strategic direction and vision of the consumer-facing mobile apps. This included the development and launch of several games, supporting internal tools, and ad monetization services. In addition to product leadership, Rowena also has a background in digital marketing. In her spare time, Rowena enjoys trying out new recipes and traveling.
Mina PajevicMatt ShapoMatt Shapo is a product development and digital strategy leader who brings more than 20 years of experience overseeing the creation and multi-platform delivery of online content and internet advertising to his role as the Director of Digital Audio and Video at the IAB.
Before IAB, Matt served as VP of Digital Content for the All Access Music Group, a music marketing company and audio industry news publisher where he planned and led advertising, editorial, and other growth initiatives for AllAccess.com, a B2B website that delivers breaking news, data, and commentary to an audience of professional audio content creators, salespeople, and decisionmakers.
Over the course of his career, Matt has directed and measured the effectiveness of integrated advertising and email marketing campaigns for multiple leading record labels and radio companies. He has also led the ideation, development, launch, and continuous iteration of profitable digital media products, including an industry leading digital audio distribution platform that delivers new music and related content to a nationwide user base of radio stations, streaming services, tv networks, podcasters, and others.
Matt holds a B.A. in Political Science and International Relations from Tufts University and an M.F.A. in Radio, TV, and Film Production from Florida State University, and he is a devoted fan of his hometown Miami Dolphins. He lives with his wife, Jennifer, and their wonderful son Evan, in Randolph, NJ where he is an enthusiastic hiker and a proud member of the Randolph High School Marching Rams parents’ road crew.
Colleen ShieldsColleen Shields joined the IAB in 2012, and supports the IAB Tech Lab in advancing the team’s work of producing protocols and tools that help companies implement global industry technical standards. Colleen is a native Wisconsinite, though she has lived in London and Sydney previously. In her spare time she enjoys attending storytelling and comedy events around New York, pointing out that all things great in the world stem from Wisconsin, hiding her North-woods accent, and working on silversmithing in her basement.
Brooke StevensElizabeth AcayanAs a CMS (content management system) admin and project coordinator, Elizabeth is involved with content, page creation, and maintenance of the website. She plans, customizes and integrates third party softwares and applications with the website for the best possible user experience.
Brian AlbertBrian Albert leads the US Google/YouTube media partnerships team, driving strategic display & video deals with our largest advertising clients and agency partners. He also is responsible for all Google Preferred & other YouTube premium video upfront negotiations. Before this, Brian led a team which enabled independent media & creative agencies to unlock value across Google's media properties & technology platforms.
Prior to Google, Brian spent 15+ years as a labor & employment attorney, sports marketer representing professional athletes, Internet entrepreneur at 3 early stage start-ups and digital marketing agency executive.
He served on the Ad Council's inaugural Social Impact Council in 2016 and currently supports YouTube’s involvement with the IAB Digital Content NewFronts. A graduate of The University of Michigan and The George Washington University Law School, Brian resides just outside Boston, MA with his wife and son.
LaToya AndersonI have 20 years experience in accounting and administration. Before joining IAB, I started my career as a Client Associate at Chase Manhattan Bank in Global Trading. I then moved on from Chase and started working at Bank of New York as a Financial Analyst in Investment Management. I decided I wanted to try a little something different and started working at Long Island University as a Executive Assistant. I enjoyed it and it definitely was too easy so I went back to accounting. I started working at Major Food Group (Carbone, Sadelles, The Grill, and Lobster Club to name a few) a very well known Hospitality Group as a Staff Accountant.
I love traveling with my two amazing daughters Tatiana and Tiana along with my significant other. I enjoy watching Football and I am a huge fan of the Philadelphia Eagles. When I visit my country Belize I volunteer at the Orphanage Child Care Program.
I am a alumni of Berkeley College where I received my degree in Accounting. I am a member of the National Black Accountants Association.
Renie AndersonRenie Anderson was named Chief Revenue Officer and Executive Vice President, NFL Partnerships in March of 2019. In this role, Anderson oversees the League’s partnership divisions, including sponsorship, new business, consumer products, and media sales.
Anderson manages a team that creates new partnerships in open categories and maintains the relationships and activation of the NFL’s current corporate sponsors and licensees, including blue-chip companies such as Pepsi, Microsoft, P&G, Verizon, Bose, Nike, New Era, EA, and many more. In addition to partnerships, Anderson is also responsible for all media sales for the League’s owned and operated media assets, including NFL Network and NFL Digital Media.
Anderson, who joined the National Football League in 2006 after nine seasons at the Arena Football League, has garnered numerous awards and accolades. She is a Hall of Fame honoree of the Sports Business Journal’s prestigious Forty Under 40 award; an Ad Age 40 Under 40 winner; a 2016 WISE Woman of the Year; a Sports Business Journal “Game Changer”; and was named one of “The Most Powerful Women in Sports” by Adweek.
Anderson graduated from the University of Mississippi in 1997 with a degree in Journalism and resides in Darien, Conn., with her husband Chris McCloskey and daughters Callie and Kate.
Kyle AntoianKyle Antoian is the Vice President, Strategic Partnerships at Epsilon, responsible for identifying and integrating new partnership opportunities into the company’s product line. Antoian helps lead the strategic partnerships group at Epsilon and focuses on data commercialization, new product incubation, and partnerships.
Kyle joined Epsilon from Datran Media where he led strategic partnership expansion with a focus on growing the user base of publishers and sustaining and prospecting match partners. Prior to that he was Marketing Manager at Takkle Inc, tasked with new customer acquisition and analytics.
Kyle holds a bachelor’s degree in Economics from Duke University. He is the assistant coach of Philadelphia-Whitemarsh Rugby Football Club and sits on the board of the Eastern Pennsylvania Rugby Union.
Yoav ArnsteinYoav Arnstein is the Director of Product Marketing for Publisher Solutions in Facebook’s London office. Yoav joined Facebook from LiveRail. Previously, he was at Legolas Media where he was CEO and grew the company to a multi-million dollar revenue business. Prior to Legolas, Yoav was at Eyeblaster (now MediaMind) where he was GM International, and then GM North American operations. At Eyeblaster, Yoav oversaw revenue growth of more than 5x, opened multiple international offices and helped build Eyeblaster into the world’s leading rich media ad platform. Yoav holds a B.Sc in Computer Science and Statistics from Tel-Aviv University and an M.Sc. in Computer Engineering from Denmark’s Technical University.
Craig AtkinsonAs Chief Digital and Operating Officer at PHD USA, Craig maintains a dual role with oversight of the agency overall as well as serving as the champion of thought leadership and innovation focused on the agency’s output.
Craig came to PHD after 6+ years at sister agencies OMD and Omnicom Media Group where, most recently he served as Chief of Acquisitions, North America, leading strategic and corporate development for Omnicom Media Group, with a particular focus on emerging areas of digital channels including search marketing, mobile, social media and content development. In addition, Craig was the overall owner of the client relationship for the McDonald’s US business at OMD.
Before taking on the Acquisitions role, Craig served as Midwest Regional Director at OMD and was responsible for the strategic direction and regional oversight of OMD’s Chicago operations.
Craig has held positions within digital marketing since its inception in the mid 1990’s, playing key Account, Media and Strategy roles at Modem Media, Digitas, and Arc Worldwide leading digital marketing strategy and program development for such clients as Intel, Michelin, HP, the U.S. Army and Allstate. Craig also spent two years on the client side working inside Washington Mutual’s ecommerce group as a product manager, leading development of applications to acquire and securitize mortgage backed loans.
A frequent speaker and recognized thought leader in the emerging and digital marketing landscape, Craig is regularly quoted in such publications as The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, Advertising Age and Adweek.
Craig is a graduate of the University of Vermont, recently relocated to the NY area and is thoroughly enjoying eating his way through his new neighborhood in Brooklyn with his wife Nikki and sons Jake and Sam.
Matthew AzarkMatt has worked in digital media for over 12 years with stops at companies like[email protected], CBS Interactive, and Undertone. He currently lives in Park Slope, Brooklyn with his wife (who is also in the industry) and 4-year-old son.
Sheri BachsteinSheri Bachstein leads the consumer division for The Weather Company, an IBM Business (Weather). This includes overseeing all aspects of The Weather Channel and Weather Underground consumer properties, including product management and design, content development and global expansion across the organization on Weather’s owned and operated properties.
Sheri has played a role on many different aspects of The Weather Channel digital properties since joining in 2007. Previously she was head of global audience growth and has also led international consumer product for weather.com and The Weather Channel apps. While leading web efforts, she moved weather.com to a fully responsive site, improved SEO efforts, optimized referral traffic, and oversaw engagement and lifestyle sponsorship efforts. As vice president of product operations, Sheri’s overseen monetization, operations and the agile team. She’s also worked as a leader for audience products, as well as in product management for weather.com and global products.
But this isn’t her first stint at The Weather Channel. She worked previously for the television network as a producer and as part of the “storm tracking” team that went into the field to cover storms (1997-2000). Before returning to Weather, Sheri served as vice president of product and content at RMS Networks in Fort Lauderdale, FL. In her career she has also worked as a producer for WGNX-TV, Atlanta’s CBS affiliate.
Sheri is a member of Women in Cable Telecommunications (WICT) and has won multiple media awards, including an Emmy Award for breaking news coverage of the Atlanta Centennial Park bombing and an Associated Press Award for sports reporting.
An Atlanta native, Sheri received her bachelor’s degree in journalism from Georgia State University. She enjoys playing golf, traveling and cooking.
Rafeh BaigLalit BalchandaniPaul BannisterPaul is the Chief Strategy Officer at CafeMedia, the world’s largest ad management service, providing the technology and services that help the highest quality publishers grow their businesses and maximize success. The company serves over 3,000 independent publishers whose distinctive voices are shaping the open web. The company’s collective of creators reaches more than 160 million monthly unique visitors, ranking as the 11th largest digital entity and as #1 in Food, Family, and Home.Paul focuses on new product innovation, strategic partnerships, and corporate development at CafeMedia. During his time at CafeMedia, he led the company’s transition to a programmatic-first approach, spearheaded the early adoption of header bidding, and directed the transition to a publisher services model. Paul has worked in digital media and advertising since the mid-90s, starting a major video game publisher out of his parent’s basement. He worked for early internet pioneers including USWeb/CKS and CMP Media.
Airey BaringerAirey Baringer is Head of Product at Quantcast. At Quantcast, Airey is focused on developing product and business solutions at the intersection of privacy and advertising.
Previously, Airey led business and product development teams for consumer internet and SaaS products, including products focused on helping consumers complete their taxes, understand and act in accordance with the Affordable Care Act, and increase access to sustainable food products. In his free time, Airey is usually trail running, backpacking, cycling, and eating his way through the San Francisco Bay Area.
Lea BarthelemyLea brings diverse experiences ranging from B2B and B2C marketing, amongst other various industries. She is beyond excited to be joining the IAB marketing team!Christina BeaumierChristina Beaumier can get by in a few languages. She can order street food in Spanish and handle tribal negotiations in Burkina Faso in French. She understands the artist’s argot of her Northampton, MA hometown; comprehends the brainier dialects that originate at MIT, her alma mater; and is attuned to the intricacies of the Brooklyn accent, where she now lives with her family.
After a Peace Corps stint in Burkina Faso, and business school at MIT Sloan, Christina started her post-MBA career in investment banking, learning an analytical linguistics based on rigor and numbers. She was then exposed to the more creative syntax of the marketing world.
This path led her to Xaxis where she had a meteoric rise, starting as Director Strategic Engagements, then VP Global Client Development, then VP Media Product Development, and ultimately becoming SVP and leader of their digital ad unit. She was most recently a Strategic Partner Lead, Video Distributors and Telco, at Google, further solidifying her position as the Most Interesting Women in Ad Tech.
Her combined studies across continents and industries have made her into one of the most fluent translators in ad tech:Within ad tech, nothing is a silo! There’s always a business development angle, a client angle, a technology angle, a media angle, a product angle… so being able to speak different languages and relate to different stakeholders is a powerful tool to help bridge gaps and bring people together.
Christina now brings her encyclopedic experience and comprehensive understanding of the industry to her role as VP, Product, TV Platform for AT&T’s advertising and analytics company Xandr. She considers this to be the perfect place to bring everything together: the rigor of analytics and the stories of brands, finally translated into a message that people care to hear.
The future at AT&T is exciting and not without uncertainty, but Christina finds herself comfortable in imbalance. She believes that the essence of business and life is a commitment to always correcting those imbalances, and finding the best way forward.
Advertising needs to relearn how to communicate with humans; Christina is the polyglot for the job.
Tom BedecarréTom Bedecarré is one of the most influential leaders in advertising today. Recently named “Silicon Valley’s Favorite Adman” by Fortune Magazine, he was described as a rare hybrid who has cred with both Silicon Valley techies and advertising’s Mad Men.
Tom is CEO of AKQA, the world’s largest independent digital advertising agency. With 1,000 global employees, AKQA has offices in Amsterdam, Berlin, London, New York, San Francisco, Shanghai and Washington D.C. and serves leading clients including Audi, Heineken, Nike, Target, Visa and Xbox.
An enthusiastic entrepreneur, Tom has been an innovator and pioneer of the advertising and communications business over the last three decades. Previously, Tom was founder and CEO of Citron Haligman Bedecarré, San Francisco’s largest independent advertising agency and a leader in launching Internet brands.
Tom holds a BA degree from Stanford University and an MBA degree from the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University.
Jeff BenjaminJeff Benjamin, former Partner and Chief Creative Officer at Crispin Porter + Bogusky, joined JWT in 2012 as Chief Creative Officer, North America.
During his career, Jeff has navigated clients through the interactive landscape with great success, creating some of the world’s most pioneering and famous campaigns. His ability to lead multi-national marketers to experiment and break ground has continually opened up new doors for brands such as Best Buy, Coke Zero, Domino’s Pizza, Microsoft and Kraft. ‘Subservient Chicken’ and ‘Whopper Sacrifice,’ his campaigns for Burger King, are among the most successful viral marketing campaigns of all time.
Jeff has been recognized internationally by every major industry award show, winning the Grand Prix at Cannes in three different categories, Best of Show at the One Show, and the Grand Clio at the Clio Awards. He served as president of the Cyber Jury at Cannes in 2010, has been profiled in Fast Company and The New York Times, appeared in the ‘Creativity 50’ and is regularly called upon by television networks such as CNBC to comment on the state of the industry. His work has been showcased in numerous publications, including The Wall Street Journal, Communication Arts, Time, and Newsweek.
Varun BhagwanVarun Bhagwan is an executive with 20 years of experience leading numerous R&D projects from inception to delivery. Varun currently serves as Vice President of Product Management & Engineering at Verizon Media, where he is responsible for all Advertising Data Products: Targeting & Identity, Insights & Measurement, and Trust & Verification. Prior to the formation of Verizon Media, Varun held several leadership roles at Yahoo! focused on Data, Insights & Measurement as well as Mail Monetization Insights & Analytics.
Prior to joining Yahoo!, Varun worked in research for 12 years at IBM where his focus areas included text analytics, web-scale systems, information Integration, healthcare, and privacy.
Varun holds his Bachelor of Engineering in Electronics and Telecommunications Engineering from Maulana Azad National Institute of Technology, and his MS in Computer Science from University of Florida. Varun has invented or co-invented roughly 50 patents, is a Yahoo! Master Inventor, holds 10 honors & awards including Verizon’s top honor of the Verizon Credo Award, and produced more than 15 publications in top tier conferences and journals. Varun is also a frequent speaker at industry events and represents the company at events such as CES, Cannes Lions etc.
Sahiba BhatnagarSahiba Bhatnagar has a background in the nonprofit world, with experience at the David Lynch Foundation and UNICEF. While working for these companies, she gathered experience in administration, development, and events. Working galas and fundraisers for both these companies made her fall in love with putting together events.
Paige BilinsPaige Bilins leads Telaria’s global product team and is responsible for developing the company’s product strategy and designing and bringing to market proprietary yield and inventory management software solutions for premium video publishers across all screens and transaction types.
Prior to joining Telaria, Paige was SVP, Product Management at Freewheel where she spent over eight years. In that role, she led product strategy across two businesses resulting in double digit year-over-year growth. Ms. Bilins started her career at as a software engineer in the defense industry at Lockheed Martin and Northrop Grumman.
Paige holds a B.S. in Computer Science from Arizona State University as well as an MBA from Yale University.
Winston BinchWinston Binch is Chief Digital Officer, Deutsch North America, and one of the most accomplished digital marketing leaders and innovators of his generation. Over the past 15 years, he’s developed some of the industry’s most influential and meaningful digital campaigns, products, and experiences, bringing customization to Nike by way of Nike iD and the Pizza Tracker to Domino’s, Whopper Sacrifice to Burger King, and reinventing Volkswagen’s approach to online car shopping. He has also advised countless global brands and conglomerates on how to identify the marketing potential of the digital age, including American Express, Best Buy, Microsoft, Target, Pizza Hut, Vail Resorts, Sprint and Taco Bell. An educator and humanitarian at heart, Winston is co-founder of Boulder Digital Works at the University of Colorado, a digital continuing education program, and sits on the board of Protect Our Winters, a non-profit organization against climate change. See what he’s up to on Twitter or Instagram @winstonbinch.
Lincoln BjorkmanMarcela BonancioMarcela is an Executive Assistant that has been working with C- level in the marketing/ media/ advertising industry for over 10 years.
Renee BourneRenee Bourne is a dynamic and resourceful professional, with an exceptional background working in the ever changing, fast-paced events industry. Prior to joining IAB, Renee has worked at Dow Jones and Black Enterprise as their Sponsorship Manager. She comes with a plethora of experience handling best in class brand management for assigned accounts that brings cross platform media campaigns & national event partnerships to life.
In her spare time Renee likes to travel with her two daughters and manage her online children’s boutique.
Renee received her Associates Degree from Long Island University C.W. Post and a Bachelor of Science from SUNY Empire College.
Dan BrackettDan is the CTO of Extreme Reach. He leads innovation and development with a customer-centric revision cycle, growing our industry-leading platform with new capabilities every two weeks. With over 15 years of experience in systems architecture, application design and development of leadership, Dan is known for developing transformative advertising technology solutions.
Conor BradyConor Brady is a Global Creative Director at Huge, where he works closely with creative teams across the agency’s offices in the United States, Europe and Latin America. Conor plays a critical role in Huge’s work on integrated marketing campaigns and business development.
Before joining Huge, Conor served as Chief Creative Officer at Organic, where he was responsible for overseeing the creative discipline across all offices in the United States and Europe. He has worked with many of the world’s largest brands, including Pepsi, Intel, Hilton Hotel Group, VW, BBC, Bank of America, P&G, Nike and Conde Nast.
Conor studied at the Royal College of Art and Middlesex University and holds a BA in graphic design. Conor is an avid cyclist and lives in Brooklyn with his wife. In his spare time, he runs Elcyclista, a journal for bike design and culture.
Brad BrinegarBrad has led Durham, North Carolina-based McKinney since 2002.
Since his arrival, McKinney has more than doubled in size by building one of the most innovative business models in the advertising industry, one that blurs the line between traditional and digital media. As a result, McKinney has been recognized as one of the best agencies in the country by Advertising Age. In 2008, Brad led a management buyback of the agency from French holding company Havas.
He is also on the board of the American Association of Advertising Agencies (4A’s) and founding chair of the Interactive Advertising Bureau’s (IAB’s) Agency Advisory Board.
An anthropology major at Dartmouth, where he rowed on the varsity crew and was editor-in-chief of the humor magazine, Brad also earned a finance MBA from Columbia. Before joining McKinney, he spent two decades at global advertising giant Leo Burnett in Chicago, rising from trainee to CEO of Leo Burnett USA.
Philippe BrowningDave CampanelliDavid Campanelli is a 19 year industry veteran and a homegrown Horizon talent. As Executive Vice President, Director of Video Investment, David is in charge of all Horizon’s national TV and premium digital video buying. David oversees such accounts as GEICO, Dish, Weight Watchers Burger King, Corona, LG, Little Caesars, Capital One and others. Over the past several years Horizon has seen its billings in the National arena skyrocket to now exceed $4.3B under David’s supervision.
David has spearheaded Horizon’s “video buying” approach, helping to break down the walls between traditional TV buying and digital video buying, resulting in innovative deals on behalf of his clients. Also, he has established and oversees Horizon’s sports buying unit, which has become one of the largest sports spenders in the industry, have placed major sports platforms such as the Capital One Orange Bowl.
More recently David has set his sights on the advanced TV marketplace, creating Horizon Advanced, a dedicated team to lead Horizon’s path forward in the emerging world of data informed, programmatic and Over The Top TV.
David has already garnered some of the industry’s top honors, including winning a CableFax “Sweet 16” award and the Mediaweek All-Star Award in the National TV category.
Andrew CasaleAs President and CEO of Index Exchange, Andrew leads 300 of the brightest minds in advertising technology across the U.S., Canada and Europe. With a sharp focus on delivering benefits to media companies like The New York Times, Hearst, Daily Mail and Conde Nast as they tackle the world of automation, he’s built Index Exchange as one of the only pure-play and transparent ad exchanges in the advertising ecosystem. While he’s responsible for providing strategic direction and market vision to the company at large, he’s also hands on with all day-to-day corporate operations.
Andrew has a unique penchant for the advertising industry and the promise of its automated future. At only age 15, he was a strategic advisor for his family company, Casale Media – one of the first ad tech startups built to help marketers manage online ad inventory. 15 years later, he’s pivoted his family’s company Casale Media into Index Exchange. By doubling down on investments in engineering and infrastructure, he’s continued to grow the company’s revenue by over 100% y/y and adding headcount when needed to bolster the company’s offering.
As a respected industry thought leader, Andrew is widely sought-after for his expertise and opinions on programmatic and exchange-traded media, and the growing need to transact with transparency at the forefront of the conversation. Andrew’s bylines and media contributions have appeared in numerous publications including Ad Age, Adweek, AdExchanger, The New York Times and The Wall Street Journal.
Karen CaulfieldKaren leads Acxiom’s data product division with responsibility for data product strategy and the expansion of Acxiom’s data capabilities in the US and across global markets. Karen’s expertise lies in the design, development, and implementation of customer targeting and engagement strategies. Karen has deep experience across all aspects of the data ecosystem and is an expert on the nuances and complexities of the global data landscape with significant on-the-ground experience across EMEA, Latin America, Asia Pacific, and North America.
Before joining Acxiom Karen was Vice President of Global Data Solutions at Merkle where she focused on expanding Merkle’s data solutions into new global markets as well as working with clients to expand their CRM strategies across geographies. Prior to that, she held multiple roles in Europe and the Americas with ICLP – the global loyalty agencyJoe CepollinaJoe has 25 years of experience in both digital and physical product development leadership. He currently leads content and search advertising, as well as homepage experiences, for Microsoft News. His teams have driven a host of novel technical and product innovations in the area of native advertising, including implementation of new server-side delivery mechanisms that improve user experience, fraud rates, breakage, and yield. Joe’s passion with respect to advertising is ensuring that digital advertising is used as a force for good, allowing consumers access to trusted and valuable experiences that they would not otherwise be able to afford, or be willing to pay for. His current professional focus areas include developing industry-wide solutions that allow users to safely and proactively share information with publishers and advertisers, as well as innovating on business models in ways that help content publishers achieve sustainable economics.
Tal ChalozinTal Chalozin is Co-Founder & CTO of Innovid, the industry leader in interactive video advertising. As CTO of Innovid, Mr. Chalozin is responsible for technology development and implementation, product creation and business development activities across the company.
Mr. Chalozin is a multi-disciplinary entrepreneur, in early 2006 he co-founded the GarageGeeks (www.garageGeeks.org), a non for profit organization for creative people to meet, innovate and build noncommercial projects that would otherwise not come to life. GarageGeeks has grown to be one of Israel’s biggest “underground” organizations and its community consists of more than 1,000 active members. Prior to the GarageGeeks, Chalozin served as an officer in an elite computer unit in the Israeli Air Force for eight years, where he led the development of several military products with high algorithmic complexity.
Peter ChelalaPete Chelala is Viacom’s Vice President of Mobile and Video Partner Solutions where he focuses on driving strategy and development of mobile and video ad sales products across Viacom Media Networks’ Music, Entertainment, Kids and Family brands. He joined Viacom from The Weather Channel where he worked for the four years building and selling marketing solutions across the its mobile platform. Prior to The Weather Channel, Mr. Chelala spent three years in the online ad sales at both About.com and Yahoo!. Before moving into ad sales, he worked in production on commercials, music videos and feature films out of Los Angeles.
Debi ChirichellaDebi Chirichella is president of Hearst Magazines, one of the world’s largest publishers of monthly magazines, with 25 U.S. titles and close to 300 international editions, after serving as executive vice president, chief financial officer and director of global operations for Hearst Magazines.
She joined Hearst Magazines as senior vice president and chief financial officer in November 2011, overseeing the company’s strategic financial planning and reporting. Previously, Chirichella spent seven years at Condé Nast, where she served in a number of executive positions. From 2008 until early 2011, she was chief operating officer of Condé Nast Digital; simultaneously, beginning in 2010, she was COO of the Fairchild Fashion Group. Before that, she was chief financial officer of Condé Nast Publications.
Earlier in her career, Chirichella held several high-level planning, finance and operations roles at Primedia, and most recently, she served as CFO/COO at Prometheus Global Media.
Chirichella is a graduate of Princeton University and received her master’s degree in business from Harvard University. She currently resides in Mountain Lakes, New Jersey, with her husband and three children.
Brent ChoiVery few have had a run like Brent Choi over the past decade. Prior to being tapped to lead both J. Walter Thompson New York and Canada in 2015, Brent helped to transform the company’s Canadian operation, winning new business and leading the agency to be named Strategy’s 2015 Silver Agency of the Year. In fact, since 2000, Brent has helped two different agencies to become Agency of the Year in Canada.
Now, Brent drives industry-leading creative work for clients like Johnson & Johnson, Puma, Kellogg’s Special K, Tim Hortons, Air Canada, and more.
In 2013, Brent was the #2 ranked Chief Creative Officer in the world for his digital work, and consistently ranked as one of Canada’s top 10 creative directors. In the past few years, he has received several Cannes Lions (including two golds), multiple CLIOs and D&AD pencils, AdAge’s Top Five Ads of the Year, and was one of only 11 worldwide winners of the inaugural Fast Company Innovation Award. His work has also been featured numerous times in Mashable, Wired, Forbes, CNN, and Fast Company.
Some would say his creative success is because he started with a business degree from Ivey, one of Canada’s top business schools. Others will argue it’s in spite of it. At home he is a proud dad, insane NFL fan, and loving husband. His wife would add “In that order.”Halle ClemensPrior to joining Tech Lab, Halle worked as a production assistant on commercials for companies such Apple, Nike, Tostitos. During the pandemic, she was a volunteer teacher’s assistant at a refugee center, working with refugees from North Africa, the Middle East, and Central Asia.
Travis ClingerAs Senior Vice President of Addressability and Ecosystem at LiveRamp, Travis is responsible for leading the company’s global digital advertising ecosystem strategy: leading strategic initiatives, advancing global partnerships, and overseeing the business development and go-to-market strategies for key addressability products and initiatives. The Authenticated Traffic Solution is one such product, enabling publishers to link their first party identity to IdentityLink and then connect to the IdentityLink infrastructure LiveRamp has built across partner platforms to enable marketers to buy and measure on IdentityLink. Travis is a co-founder and Board Member of the Advertising ID Consortium, advocating for people-based identifiers to be transacted across the open Internet. Prior to joining LiveRamp, Travis was a director at Epic Systems responsible for implementing systems that managed sensitive healthcare information. Travis holds a BA in Political Science from Rollins College.
Paul holds a BSE, EECS from Princeton University, an MS in Computer Science from John Hopkins University and an MBA from the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania.
Dennis ColonChristine CookChristine Cook is senior vice president and chief revenue officer of CNN Digital, WarnerMedia Ad Sales. In this leadership position, Cook oversees sales strategy for CNN’s overall digital portfolio, which includes premium verticals, mobile products, programmatic, and emerging businesses. Based in New York, Cook reports to Joe Hogan, executive vice president of sales and marketing for WarnerMedia.
Cook plays a critical role in creating a holistic sales approach across CNN’s digital business, while strengthening digital revenue opportunities in line with the company’s go-to-market strategies. With a special focus on video, social and rich branded content campaigns, Cook also partners closely with the Content Partnerships team and Courageous brand studio to bring to life the KPIs of ad partners across CNN’s digital footprint.
Prior to joining WarnerMedia, Cook served as senior vice president and global head of advertising partnerships at Flipboard. During her six years at the company, Cook oversaw the global sales force and mobile-led revenue strategy. As an advisor, and then founding member of the advertising business team, she built the partnerships unit from the ground up, which was responsible for publisher partnerships, advertising sales, operations and creative brand marketing strategy. Prior to joining Flipboard in 2012, Cook held leadership roles at The Daily, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, IAC/InterActiveCorp, Financial Times, and New York Times Digital, where she founded the company’s first international sales office in London.
Cook was most recently named a 2020 She Runs It Changing the Game honoree. She also was honored as a 2019 Broadcasting & Cable Digital All-Star and on the 2018 Cynopsis Digital It List. She is an active member of the Internet Advertising Bureau (IAB), Mobile Marketing Association (MMA), Digital Ascendant, Digital Content Next, Advertising Women of New York/She Runs It, and New York Women in Communications. A graduate from Louisiana University with a Bachelor of Arts in English Literature, History and Spanish, Cook currently resides in New York City.
WarnerMedia is a leading media and entertainment company that creates and distributes premium and popular content from a diverse array of talented storytellers and journalists to global audiences through its consumer brands including: HBO, HBO Max, Warner Bros., TNT, TBS, truTV, CNN, DC, New Line, Cartoon Network, Adult Swim, Turner Classic Movies and others. The organization also includes Xandr’s suite of advanced advertising solutions designed to help to improve advertising for brands, publishers, and consumers. WarnerMedia is part of AT&T Inc. (NYSE:T).
Jim CowsertAs VP, Enterprise Brand, Advertising and Media, at Voya Financial, Jim leads brand strategy, creative development and media planning. Jim’s current focus is building the Voya Financial brand introduced in the fall of 2014. His responsibilities include ensuring Voya’s brand is effectively expressed across television, digital, mobile, social and search platforms for consumer and business audiences. He has a passion for developing high impact integrated initiatives with partners, building messaging across touch points, and driving a measurement based culture.
Prior to joining Voya Financial, Jim led agency and client teams developing and executing brand strategy, creative, and media for companies in financial, real estate, healthcare, and retail industries. He has MBA and BA degrees from Duke University and resides in Atlanta.
Susan CredleEvery agency says it wants “to do great creative,” but for Chief Creative Officer Susan Credle, it’s the reason why that matters. “Great creative has to build helpful, meaningful brands for the long-term,” she says. “That’s the sum of what we at Leo Burnett do, and what I’ve set out to do my entire career.”She came to Leo Burnett in the fall of 2009, after more than two decades at BBDO in which she rose from “bathroom-break girl” for the agency’s receptionists to EVP Executive Creative Director. There, Susan reinvented the iconic M&M’s characters; turned Cingular Wireless from a start-up into a leader brand; and created other consistently award-winning work for such clients as Bank of America, FedEx, Gillette, Lowe’s, PepsiCo, Pizza Hut and Visa.
Since joining Leo Burnett, Susan has spearheaded a creative renaissance at the agency through an eye for new top talent, a commitment to work that benefits brands and the world, and a vision for clients that always looks beyond a single campaign or ad.
Susan’s leadership, inspiration and in-the-trenches contributions have led to legacy-respecting yet forward-looking campaigns like McDonald’s Happy Meal “Happy Tales,” Kellogg’s Special K “What Will You Gain When You Lose?” Secret’s “Mean Stinks” anti-bullying campaign and, one of the most beloved and awarded platform ideas, Allstate’s “Mayhem.”“I believe in purpose-driven brands and having pride in something in lasts,” she says. “And, as we say here at Leo, that creativity can transform human behavior.”Susan serves on the Boards of the University of North Carolina’s School of Journalism and Mass Communication, the American Association of Advertising Agencies, the Foundation for EXXcellence and the Creative Circus. She is a member of the Economic Club of Chicago, the Media Council at the Paley Center for Media in New York, the Creative Review Board of the Ad Council and is a supporter of Marwen and One Million Degrees in Chicago.
Adrian D'SouzaRobert D’AsaroKaran DalalKaran heads supply operations for Media.net and manages some of Media.net’s key publisher partnerships working out of the New York office. As one of the first employees, he has been instrumental in Media.net’s rise in the adtech ecosystem. His role over the last 10+ years has been focused on building and managing partnerships across the ad-tech landscape, nurturing strategic alliances and helping drive product strategy.
Prior to Media.net, Karan was an attorney in the Technology & Media practice of one of India’s premier law firms. He is deeply passionate about how access to quality education can help alleviate global poverty and spent over a year living and teaching in a remote village in India to improve the educational infrastructure for teachers and students.
Karan holds a BS in Computer Science and Mathematics from University of Illinois – Urbana-Champaign and a Bachelor of Laws degree from Mumbai University.
Eric DanetzEric joined Thomson Reuters as Head of Revenue in April of 2020. In this role, Eric has oversight of all revenue lines and is responsible for accelerating growth across the Agency and Consumer businesses. He joined Reuters from AccuWeather, where he was Chief Business Officer, overseeing all global revenue-generating products, services, marketing and business development.
As the Head of Revenue for Reuters, Eric will lead our sales and customer success teams globally while establishing a holistic revenue growth strategy involving the targeting of new market segments, diversifying customers and categories, and identifying cross-selling opportunities across the wider portfolio.
Eric is an exceptional sales executive with an impressive track record in building new revenue streams, attracting new customers and scaling high growth media businesses. He reports into the President of Reuters and sits on the Reuters Executive Committee.
David DanzigerDavid Danziger is the Vice President of Enterprise Partnerships at The Trade Desk, a global demand-side platform in the $5B real-time bidding industry. In his role at The Trade Desk, David leads the company's strategic partnerships for data, targeting, and measurement. His emphasis is creating relationships that increase effectiveness of The Trade Desk clients’ media buys through improved front-end targeting or back-end analytics.
David is an adtech and data industry veteran having previously served as senior director of data solutions at Merkle and director of data products at Acxiom.
David is a graduate of The University of Michigan and The University of Texas.
Mainardo De NardisMainardo de Nardis has been CEO of OMD Worldwide since 2009.
OMD Worldwide is a leading global media communications agency, recognized for its global footprint, strategic integration and creative innovation. It has been acknowledged as Most Creative Media Agency by The Gunn Report for nine consecutive years; Adweek Global Media Agency of the Year for 2008, 2009, 2011, 2013 and 2014; and the 2002, 2005, 2009 and 2011 Media Agency of the Year by Advertising Age.
Prior to joining OMD he was CEO of both Aegis Media and Mediaedge:cia Worldwide. He was a co-founder of one of Italy’s “third wave” ad agencies before moving from advertising to media communications to start Medianetwork, Italy’s first media independent.
Mainardo presided over the Cannes Festival’s Media Lions Jury in 2012 and sits on the Boards of Omnicom Media Group and the Ad Council. He resides in NY and London with his family.
Colleen DeCourcyBrian DiLorenzoMiranda DimopoulosMiranda Dimopoulos is the Regional CEO of the IAB SEA+India, a not-for-profit association that elevates the digital industry locally, regionally and globally.
Under her leadership, the membership has grown more than twelvefold in the last five years. An economist and expert on Asia, Miranda is a sought-after public speaker and commentator internationally on the insights and opportunities to grow investment in this diverse region. She has served as a Singapore Government Board Member for Critical Infocomm Technology since 2016, is an official advisor to the Indonesia, Thailand and India Governments and launched the 2018 partnership with the Economic Development Board (EDB) and Workforce Singapore (WSG) for a 2 year programme developing Programmatic talent.
Miranda was one of Campaign APAC’s 40 under 40 2016, CMO Asia and World Brand Congress Top 50 Leaders in Asia 2016, Campaign APAC Women to Watch (Agents of Change) 2016, the only person from APAC on the The Drum New Years Global Honours List 2017, World Women’s Congress Super Influencer 2017 (Top 10 Global Leaders) and Business Top Leader APAC 2018.
Jerry DischlerJerry Dischler is a Vice President and General Manager at Google, and oversees Google’s Advertising products including search, display, shopping, travel and video advertising, as well as analytics.
A 10+ year Ads veteran, Jerry led Google to move beyond plain text ads to deeper experiences, including the development of Ad Sitelinks and Product Listing Ads. Through various leadership roles on the team, he’s played an important role in defining the future of advertising at Google including leading the transition from desktop to mobile advertising, accelerating direct response advertising on YouTube, and developing new ad products for SMBs.
Prior to his current role, Jerry led the product and engineering teams for ads on Google’s owned and operated properties (Search, YouTube, Maps, Gmail, Discover), buying platforms (Google Ads, Search Ads 360, Display & Video 360), and Google’s home-grown sales and support platform. Earlier in his career at Google, Jerry led Google’s commerce products, including Google Checkout (now Google Pay) and Google Product Search (now Google Shopping).
Before Google, Jerry served as the Director of Engineering at Avolent where he was instrumental in developing the company’s award-winning billing and payment products. He also worked in engineering and leadership roles at Hyperion, Sana Security, and Accenture, where his work focused on enterprise billing, customer care, and security software.
Jerry earned his bachelor’s degree from the University of Chicago and his MBA from The Wharton School of Business.
Michael DorfMichael Dorf serves as Vice President of Revenue Operations at Univision Communications Inc. Michael oversees all of Yield Management, Ad Operations, Programmatic and Advertising Solutions.
Previously, Michael lead the Media Operations team at Freewheel, a Comcast Company and was able to bridge the gaps between Linear, Digital and Programmatic advertising. Prior to that he was at Conde Nast where he led the Ad Operations across Video, Programmatic, Display and Native. He started his career running Revenue Operations for Blip Networks which was eventually acquired by Disney via Maker Studios.
Gilad ElbazGil Elbaz is the Founder and CEO of Factual, a data company that enables developers, publishers and advertisers to build highly relevant mobile experiences using the context of location. Prior to Factual, Gil co-founded Applied Semantics Inc. (ASI), which developed contextual advertising products, including ASI’s AdSense. Google acquired ASI in 2003, where Gil stayed on as the director of engineering, continuing to work on AdSense and other products. In 2008, Gil founded The Common Crawl Foundation, a non-profit with the goal of democratizing access to web information to enable greater innovation in research, business and education. He continues to serve on the board there as well as on the board of the X Prize Foundation. Gil is an active angel investor. He recently co-founded TenOneTen ventures with David Waxman, and his notable investments include Climate Corporation (acquired by Monsanto for $1.2 billion), GoodReads (acquired by Amazon), Scopely, and Kaggle. Gil earned a B.S. with a double major in Engineering & Applied Science and Economics from the California Institute of Technology.
Dennis EllisTom EslingerTom works across Saatchi & Saatchi’s worldwide digital capability and is based in NYC and spends 50% of his time in China as Greater China Chief Digital Officer. He has both a worldwide focus across integrated creative, strategy and operations, adding talent, new capabilities and forging worldwide partnerships with creative partners and platforms. In 2014, Tom added Digital Executive Creative Director to the Asia Pacific/China region to his creative and strategic duties. Tom is a highly awarded digital and mobile creative director, with 69 Cannes Lions across multiple categories and 100s of international awards. Following his Presidency of the Cyber Lions, Tom was the first President of the Mobile Lions in 2012. The Creative Data jury at Cannes 2015 is Tom’s fifth Cannes jury, having served on the 2002 Cyber and 2006 Titanium juries. He is a member of Saatchi & Saatchi’s Worldwide Creative Board and works on the development of the annual New Director’s Showcase at Cannes Lions. Tom’s creative work is part of the permanent design collections of Museum of Modern Art in NYC and the Smithsonian Institute in Washington DC. Naturally Tom’s work has become all things social and mobile. He champions the necessity, tactics, and possibilities of mobile advertising and marketing in his recently published book “Mobile Magic”, where he takes readers step-by-step through his process for creating truly mobile ideas. Tom lives with his partner Gregory and their Lakeland Terrier Berkeley Jackson in the Financial District of Manhattan.
Anne EspinalAnne Espinal joins IAB as an Account Manager for the Member Engagement and Development team focusing on post-sale management. Previously, Anne was with Nielsen on the Client Solutions Team working directly with clients to inform and support Nielsen products for both traditional TV and digital offerings. Prior to that, Anne worked on the Audio team at Univision, managing sold audio sponsorships from inception to execution as well as planning and strategizing media plans. Anne brings her experience in client relationship and project management to execute seamless sponsorships and campaigns for IAB and its members.
Towney FeehanTownsend Feehan is CEO of IAB Europe. Prior to joining IAB Europe, Townsend worked for Microsoft Legal & Corporate Affairs in Brussels and ran EU industry associations in the ICT, consumer electronics and biotechnology sectors. Townsend has an M. Phil. in European policy from the law faculty of the University of Edinburgh.
Konrad FeldmanKonrad Feldman, CEO, co-founded and launched Quantcast in 2006 along with Paul Sutter to transform the effectiveness of online advertising through the use of science and scalable computing. Prior to co-founding Quantcast, Feldman co-founded Searchspace (now Fortent) the leading provider of terrorist financing detection and anti-money laundering software for the world’s financial services industry. As CEO of Searchspace’s North American business, he established the business in the US and directed its rapid growth to become a market leader. Prior to Searchspace, Feldman was a Research Fellow in the Intelligent Systems Laboratory at University College London. Feldman holds a Bachelor of Science in Computer Science from University College, London.
Tony FicarrottaTony is an experienced lawyer specializing in issues affecting digital advertising and media. Most recently, Tony was attorney at ZwillGen, where his practice focused on advising ad-tech platforms, social media companies, and digital publishers on strategy and compliance in connection with privacy requirements. Tony previously served as counsel for the Network Advertising Initiative and worked at an international law firm. Tony holds a J.D. from the Duke University School of Law, and an M.A. in philosophy from Georgetown University.
Kirsten FlanikKirsten is the Managing Director of BBDO New York.â€¨â€¨In addition to her agency responsibilities, Kirsten oversees the Mars business (which includes more than a dozen of the company’s major chocolate, pet and food brands), FedEx, ExxonMobil and the agency’s public service efforts in support of Autism Speaks. â€¨â€¨Since joining BBDO in 2006, Kirsten has been named a “Woman to Watch” as well as one of the “100 Most Influential Women in Advertising” by Ad Age.
â€¨Outside of her day-to-day responsibilities, Kirsten serves on the board of Somerset Hills Learning Institute, one of the premier institutions for children with Autism, is a member of Advertising Women of New York and BBDO’s Women Leadership Council, a group dedicated to helping women succeed in the workplace.â€¨â€¨ Kirsten is a 1989 graduate of the University of Florida. She currently resides in Brooklyn with her husband and their two children.
Tom FochettaTom Fochetta is an experienced business leader and media veteran with more than 20+ years of digital advertising experience. He currently serves as Vice President of Samsung Ads, a leading provider of Advanced TV advertising solutions.
Tom has a proven track record for spearheading high-impact sales teams at world-class media, commerce and hardware companies, including Google and Amazon. As the founding executive of Samsung Ads in 2015, Tom was tasked with establishing its global ad sales platform. Among his responsibilities, he leads the Americas’ ad sales, client solutions, and operations, and oversees the Company’s advertising platform across Samsung’s Smart TV and digital ecosystem.
Tom reports up into Samsung’s Corporate Offices in South Korea and frequently informs Executive Leadership of Market Conditions to seek further investment. Armed with a deep understanding of viewership preferences and Smart TV usage, Samsung Ads is a leader in Advanced TV, bringing innovation to advertising and empowering more efficient and effective media strategies. Under Tom’s leadership, Samsung Ads has achieved significant year-over-year growth over the past five years.
Through acquisitions, technology enhancements and the development of an end- to-end tech stack, Tom has opened up a new world of opportunities for the sales team and their clients. In fact, Tom championed the acquisition of AdGear and was part of the Deal Team from Samsung’s M&A arm to acquire the foundation of a fully owned and operated tech stack.
Today, Samsung Ads works with Fortune 500 advertisers selling and servicing ads natively, across over-the-top (OTT)/Connected TV, display and mobile, leveraging its unique audience platform. Tom is an outspoken advocate for the Advanced TV industry, not only sitting on the IAB’s Board of Directors but actively participating in many other industry associations to help educate the industry on Connected TV and evangelize Samsung Ads’ platform.
Tom holds an MBA and a Bachelor of Science in Marketing and Management from St. Johns University. He lives on Long Island with his wife and two sons.
Carl FremontKurt FuleppKurt Fulepp is the Global Chief Product Officer of AccuWeather. In this key leadership role, Kurt is responsible for the vision, strategy and design for the enterprise-wide product portfolio, as well as brand design, creative services, audience & analytics, business intelligence and mobile app development.
As CPO, Kurt is charged with every element of the AccuWeather product roadmap, from conceptualization to launch and post-launch performance. Drawing on his extensive experience working at the intersection of cutting-edge digital products and premium content, he leads the development of the latest ecosystems of products, leveraging artificial intelligence, big data, and connected and smart devices. His expertise in multiplatform storytelling, product management, content commercialization, and cross-platform brand development shapes how AccuWeather delivers weather information to consumers and enterprises around the world.
Before joining AccuWeather, Kurt served as Vice President and Digital General Manager of News and Business at Time, Inc leading the digital brands of TIME, Money & Fortune. Previously, he was Vice President and Head of Product at AOL, Inc., where he oversaw product management, technology and design of AOL’s core business of AOL.com, as well as a portfolio of lifestyle brands focused on home, food, style, weddings and women’s leadership. Concurrent with his AOL tenure, Kurt also served as General Manager of MAKERS.com, providing end-to-end leadership for this first-of-its-kind multiplatform video destination, which profiled exceptional women and their groundbreaking achievements.
Earlier in his career, Kurt served as Senior Manager, Consumer Marketing for NineMSN (Microsoft’s joint-venture in Australia) covering Bing, MSN and Windows Live (incl. Hotmail, SkyDrive & WebApps), as well as Director of Marketing at Nine Television Network Australia; one of Australia’s largest commercial television networks.
Kurt is also as an adjunct professor in the Master of Science in Publishing – Digital Media program at New York University, teaching a course that examines the various business models in digital media and what it takes to build a successful digital publishing business.
He resides in New York City and based at AccuWeather’s New York office at 7 World Trade Center.
Jackie GarciaJackie has extensive accounting experience in the non-profit sector working alongside the Archdiocese of NY working in customer support, accounts receivable, cash receipts, and treasury functions. Jackie is thrilled about starting her new role at IAB.
Isabelle Garrick-OkoliIsabelle joins IAB as a Salesforce Coordinator. Prior to coming to IAB, Isabelle worked as an engagement manager at a DC consulting firm where she also administered their Salesforce instance. That nurtured an interest in pursuing Salesforce more deliberately as a career path and led her here. In her free time, she likes to make candles, do crosswords and explore new cities. Isabelle looks forward to learning from and working with the team at IAB.
Gina GarrubboGina Garrubbo is President and CEO of National Public Media (NPM), where she is committed to ensuring the continued growth of NPR and the public media system via funding from corporate sponsors. Garrubbo has spent more than 20 years in traditional and digital media growing marketing and sales teams, launching brands and building companies. She was one of the builders of Women.com, one of the first websites for women, and BlogHer, which brought independent voices to millions of readers. Garrubbo built advertising sales teams for Oxygen Media, Discovery Communications and in syndicated television. She is Chair of the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB) Board of Directors. She also sits on the Board of Directors of Tappp (an OTT video service), Glen Highland Farm and the Philanthropic Leadership board of EatREAL.org.
Erik GeislerErik leads the Facebook US & Canada Agency teams based in New York and is part of NA Sales Team. His team’s mission is to advance the value that agencies bring their partners through the “relentless pursuit of progress”! Additionally, Erik is the executive sponsor for the Facebook Reserve video solutions that feature In-Stream videos in Watch. He previously led the Technology and Telecommunication team at Facebook for over four years. Prior to Facebook, Erik has founded several companies under the common theme of “changing the way brands advertise”. In 1994, he was a founding partner at Student Advantage, a college marketing company that is credited with establishing the benefits of Youth and Student marketing. In 2005, as a partner and Chief Strategy Officer at Noise, his digital agency produced the first ever marketing campaign on Facebook for Chase credit card services. Erik lives in Brooklyn with his wife Rachel, daughter Ryan (12) and son Logan (11) and enjoys cooking, golf and snowboarding.
Quentin GeorgeAs Chief Innovation Officer, Quentin George is responsible for the overall growth, development and implementation of Mediabrands’ intelligence capabilities including its incubation practice and the physical and virtual Media Labs. Quentin serves as the key driver of all group activities that address not only the complexities of the digital arena for Mediabrands’ clients, but also educates and informs our clients on the hidden opportunities within the space. Internally, he will continue to transform the Mediabrands culture, creating a toolkit of resources that connects the network with a complete catalog of Mediabrands’ services and platform capabilities, partner solutions and case studies. In addition, Quentin will identify and introduce Mediabrands and IPG leadership to potential technology and content partners that are ideally suited to enable our network and clients to grow.
One of the most tenured leaders in the digital arena, Quentin was appointed Chief Digital Officer, Mediabrands in 2009. He joined the IPG Network in 2007 and was named Global Lead, Digital Media and Strategic Innovation for Universal McCann. Prior to his role at UM, he served as Chief of Corporate Development and Managing Director for Organic, Inc., where he grew the business substantially since joining in October 2004. During his tenure at Organic, he led assignments for clients such as Sprint, 20th Century Fox, Mitsubishi Motors and GeekSquad.
Quentin was SVP of Client Services at Avenue A/Razorfish, where he co-managed the San Francisco and Los Angeles offices and was responsible for driving online-based initiatives for clients such as Sun Microsystems, Oracle, Disney, Cisco Systems and Genentech. Back in 1994, he cofounded Electric Ocean, an internationally renowned interactive marketing agency based in Cape Town, South Africa, where he won one of the first Clios ever awarded for digital work. He’s also a founding member and former cochairman of the Digital Interactive Media Association (DIMA).
Quentin resides and makes wine in San Francisco with his wife and children.
Adam GerberAdam Gerber is Global President, Media, for Essence, a data-driven global agency that is part of WPP’s GroupM. In this role, he oversees media capabilities across all channels. This includes driving the agency’s planning, investment, activation and ad operations disciplines and their intersection with GroupM. Gerber’s priority is to build and scale innovative, cross-channel investment models rooted in data and outcome-based metrics that are tied to clients’ business success. He stepped into this role in 2018 after serving as Essence’s SVP, Investment, North America.
Gerber joined Essence in 2017 after spending six years at ABC/Disney where he departed as SVP, Client Development & Communications. Before ABC, he served as Chief Marketing Officer of Quantcast, where he was and an active industry evangelist for the digitally-oriented audience measurement and targeting company.
Prior to Quantcast, he served as VP, Advertising Product & Strategy, for Boston-based Brightcove, Inc. Previously, he was SVP, Director of Innovation & Strategy for Mediavest Worldwide, and Senior Partner/Director, Media Strategy for The Digital Edge (now Wavemaker).
In earlier roles, Gerber served as VP, Associate Media Director at Ammirati Puris Lintas; Account Manager/Interactive Marketing for America Online and Media Supervisor/Media Planner for both JWT and D’Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles. He began his career as a paralegal at Sidley & Austin in Washington, DC.
Evan GiamancoEvan Giamanco is senior vice president of sales strategy and operations at CNN Digital. In this role, Giamanco is responsible for the development and execution of CNN Digital’s advertising strategy and ad product development efforts. Based in New York, he reports to Christine Cook, senior vice president & chief revenue officer of CNN Digital.
Giamanco plays a key role in creating a holistic sales approach across CNN’s digital business, which includes premium verticals, mobile products, programmatic, emerging businesses and Great Big Story, while also strategizing digital revenue and product development opportunities that are in line with the company’s go-to-market strategies.
Before taking on his current role, Giamanco served as vice president of news content partnerships at Turner Ignite, where he developed innovative advertising solutions and powerful branded content campaigns across the company’s news brands.
Giamanco was previously vice president of business operations at SimpleReach, a company that specializes in providing content creators with measurement and optimization capabilities across digital and social channels. There, he built an operations team from the ground up, while leading campaign management and marketing across the company. Prior to SimpleReach, Giamanco was vice president of Business Insider Studios & ad strategy at Business Insider, and spent over nine years of his career at People.com, where he established his digital background.
Giamanco has a Bachelor of Business Administration in marketing and e-commerce from Fordham University, as well as a Master of Business Administration in marketing and e-commerce from St. John’s University.
WarnerMedia is a leading media and entertainment company that creates and distributes premium and popular content from a diverse array of talented storytellers and journalists to global audiences through its consumer brands including: HBO, HBO Now, HBO Max, Warner Bros., TNT, TBS, truTV, CNN, DC Entertainment, New Line, Cartoon Network, Adult Swim, Turner Classic Movies and others.
Warner Media is part of AT&T Inc. (NYSE:T).
Rajeev GoelRajeev Goel co-founded PubMatic in 2006, based on the belief that publishers are underserved from a technology and services perspective, and set out to build an automation software company focused on publishers. Under his leadership, the company has grown and matured into a major enterprise provider with more than 350 employees and 13 locations around the globe. The high pace of revenue and profit growth is fueled by Rajeev’s commitment to help publishers protect, monetize and manage their most valuable asset – the relationship between consumers, content and brands.
Rajeev is a serial entrepreneur who has raised more than $250 million in funding throughout his career.
Prior to PubMatic, he co-founded Chipshot.com, a leading online retailer of custom-built golf equipment, where he served as vice president of technology. At Chipshot, Rajeev also led product management and development, helping grow the company into a $30 million business. An experienced management consultant, he was also a principal at Diamond Management and Technology Consultants, an IT strategy consulting firm for Fortune 2000 clients, where he led teams on IT strategy engagements. In addition, Rajeev was a product marketing executive at SAP, where he was responsible for global go-to-market strategy for new products.
Rajeev served as a member of the Board of Directors of the Ad Council, a nonprofit organization and the largest producer of national public service campaigns in the U.S. He holds a master’s degree in computer science from the University of Pennsylvania and a bachelor’s degree in economics, political science and Spanish from the Johns Hopkins University.
Alanna GombertAlanna is Head of Advertising Technology at ConsenSys, a blockchain company focused on the adoption of decentralized networks and economies. She is also the CEO of the Digital Asset Trade Association (DATA), an advocacy group formed in Davos in 2018 for Distributed Ledger Technology. DATA helps to shape public policy issues to support the growth of digital assets, digital identity, smart-contracts and digital currencies and worked extensively in Wyoming and Colorado on blockchain and cryptocurrency legislation. Prior to DATA, Alanna was Global CRO at MetaX where she oversaw product creation, strategy, and go-to-market including the adChain and adToken dApps on Ethereum and the first Token Curated Registry on the Ethereum Mainnet. Before she entered the blockchain sphere, Alanna ran global advertising standards General Manager of the IAB Tech Lab. Alanna had senior roles at Accuen/Omnicom Media Group, Condé Nast and at Admeld (acquired by Google) where she helped grow Real Time Bidding from an idea into an advertising industry mainstay.
Jae GoodmanJae Goodman is Chief Creative Officer and Co-Head of CAA Marketing, a division of leading entertainment and sports agency Creative Artists Agency (CAA). Goodman works in the Los Angeles office and helps provide corporate clients with creative solutions that leverage the power of entertainment to build brands and drive business results. CAA Marketing clients include Coca-Cola, General Motors, Diageo, Chipotle, Samsung, Neiman Marcus, Burberry, Keurig, Fender and The MacArthur Foundation, among others.
CAA Marketing was the driving force behind Hasbro’s Transformers film franchise and Chipotle’s “Cultivate” campaign, including the animated short film “Back to the Start” featuring Willie Nelson covering Coldplay and its follow-up “The Scarecrow.” The campaign has won four Cannes Grand Prix awards in four different categories in the past three years.
CAA Marketing is responsible for the first and second brand films ever accepted to the Sundance Film Festival, the first-ever live interactive show on Hulu, nine Webby Awards in six years for four different clients, and eight Emmy nominations and four wins for such clients as Old Navy, Chipotle, and Dolby.
Prior to CAA, Goodman served as Senior Vice President and Executive Creative Director at Publicis & Hal Riney in San Francisco, overseeing all creative talent and work. Previously, he held creative and executive positions at Wieden+Kennedy, Leagas~Delaney, and Ogilvy & Mather.
Under Goodman’s leadership, CAA Marketing’s work has been selected as one of TED’s “10 Ads Worth Spreading,” and in 2014, Goodman was named to both Fast Company’s Most Creative People in Business 1000 and Ad Age’s Creativity 50 List.
Eden GorceyMs. Gorcey overseas product and advertising sales strategy for Condé Nast, where she focuses on turning the company’s unique assets – including data, video, programmatic, and experiential offerings – into buyable solutions that drive results for clients. Eden has held leadership roles in both agency and publisher settings, where her work leading media strategy for brands including P&G, Microsoft and Coca Cola has contributed to her status as an industry-recognized innovator.
Brian GottesmanBrian Gottesman leads monetization product development at Flipboard — the worlds largest curated content platform, with over 140 million users. In this role he oversees all monetization products from strategy to planning and execution. Prior to his time at Flipboard Brian ran product management for Amazon’s Video DSP, driving revenue growth, verification vendor business development, and feature expansion including pre-bid, performance optimization and OTT targeting. Before Amazon Brian was VP of Product at Critical Media where he designed, launched and managed Syndicaster, the first cloud-based video editing and distribution system for TV stations. He began his career at Harvard University, building web platforms for a range of departments and institutes including the Life Sciences Division, the Center for Brain Science and the Nieman Foundation.
Philippe GueltonMeredith GuinessMeredith Green is an experienced analytics professional who loves data-driven storytelling, bringing to life the meaning (the “why”) behind consumer behavior. She has spent the majority of her career agency-side, holding positions across digital planning and analytics and has a strong passion for cross-functional learning. Meredith holds bachelor’s degrees in Psychology and Italian Studies from Emory University and loves to travel, eat (is a big foodie!), and spend time with family and friends.
Jay HabeggerJay Habegger is the co-founder and CEO of ownerIQ. Jay is a pioneer in digital media and advertising having over 20 years experience. He has built The Q from it’s humble beginnings to leading the industry in second party data and as the leading programmatic solution for digital advertisers, retailers and brands. Previously, Jay was the CEO and president of Bitpipe, leading the company through to its sale to TechTarget in 2004 in a $40 million transaction Jay has been a guest speaker at events attended by C-level marketing executives discussing the evolution of digital shopper marketing, retailer monetization, and programmatic advertising. He has also written several bylines for prominent advertising and retail publications such as Ad Age, Internet Retailer, Dealerscope, and TWICE Magazine. In addition, Habegger was acknowledged in The Rayno Report’s 2014 list of Top 11 ad tech visionaries. ownerIQ has been named one of the 50 Fastest Growing Private Companies in Massachusetts by the Boston Business Journal in 2017, as a MITX Award Finalist, in Ad Age’s 2015 B2B Best Awards, Digiday Signal Awards 2015, CIO Review’s 2015 Top 20 Most Promising Retail Technologies and as a Hot Tech to Watch in 2014.
Jeff HagenJeff Hagen is the Group Director of Connections Planning & Investment for The Coca-Cola Company’s USA division. In this role he is responsible for helping build Coca-Cola’s integrated marketing strategy; focusing on building a Brand’s ability to connect with consumers using media, data and technology, and owned touchpoints across a consumer’s daily journey. With 15+ years of experience, Jeff has led both planning & investment teams at Cingular/AT&T Wireless, The Home Depot, and Arby’s. He has also worked at world renowned advertising agencies including BBDO, Initiative and OMD leading media strategy and investment across automotive, consumer packaged goods, financial services and entertainment industry accounts.
Most recently, under his leadership, the Coca-Cola Connections team has been recognized for industry leading work in integrated marketing across video, social, search, outdoor and radio and has received various awards from Effie’s, Media Post, and the Festival of Media.
Jeff lives in Sandy Springs, Georgia with his wife, Leslie, and two daughters. Jeff is an active member of his children’s school, church community and youth sports association.
Rachael HaleyRachael Haley, the Regional Marketing Director for the Americas at Airbnb, she oversees strategy and execution of all regional integrated marketing initiatives across all Airbnb businesses. She leads a team responsible for marketing content development, social media strategy and execution, and connections and media activation.
With more than 13 years in the industry, Rachael leans on her deep expertise in media and marketing strategy, including communication planning, strategic partnership development, buy negotiation, plan execution, and measurement, to build innovative marketing campaigns that disrupt the category while driving business results. Prior to Airbnb, Rachael worked in media planning and buying at a number of agencies including OMD before moving into a marketing strategy role at Netflix where she led US launch campaigns for a number of Netflix Originals including House of Cards and Orange is the New BlackJohn HalleyJohn Halley serves as Chief Operating Officer, Advertising Revenue, and Executive Vice President, Advanced Marketing Solutions (“AMS”) for ViacomCBS. In this role, Halley oversees commercial and business operations for the advertising team across the company’s leading portfolio of broadcast, entertainment, news and sports networks, as well as ViacomCBS’ advertising product suite and go-to-market strategy across its digital, social, and advanced advertising offerings spanning BET, CBS, CBS All Access, Comedy Central, MTV, Nickelodeon and Pluto TV, among others.
Halley is the former Chairman and serves on the Board of Directors of OpenAP, the television industry’s advanced audience platform, whose consortium membership includes ViacomCBS, Fox, NBCUniversal, AMC Networks, The Weather Channel and Univision. He also serves on the Board of Directors of Blockgraph, an industry-operated data and insights platform owned by ViacomCBS, Comcast NBCUniversal and Charter Communications that helps media companies and advertisers securely and transparently collaborate to apply data across TV and premium video inventory.
Halley is the Chairman of the New York Chapter of the March of Dimes, and serves on the Board of Directors of Literacy Inc., a New York-based childhood literacy organization. He holds an MBA from the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania and an Economics degree from Santa Clara University.
Matt HarringtonMatthew Harrington oversees Edelman’s four regions as well as Edelman Berland, the firm’s research arm; human resources; legal; information technology; and conflict management. A 21-year Edelman veteran, Matthew is a specialist in corporate positioning and reputation management. His expertise includes crisis communications, merger and acquisition activity and initial public offerings. Currently, Matthew provides corporate and/or issues management counsel to a range of clients, including, GE, Charles Schwab & Company, Samsung and Starbucks. Matthew is a graduate of Denison University, where he also serves on the Board of Trustees. He is a member of the Public Relations Society of America and is also a board member of the World Food Program USA, the Council of Public Relations Firms and the Classic Stage Company.
Eric HarrisEric Harris is the President & Chief Operating Officer at Cheddar, the leading post-cable network currently broadcasting Cheddar, a business news network, and Cheddar Big News, a fast-paced, young, non-partisan general news and headline news network. Before Cheddar, Eric was Chief Operating Officer at KnowMe, an innovative video and sharing platform.
Prior to that, Eric was BuzzFeed’s Chief Business Operations Officer and was responsible for all business operations and a global team of over 100 rockstars that spanned sales strategy & planning, marketing, research, events, ad product, account management, ad operations, social discovery, client analytics, and project management. Eric started at BuzzFeed as the 6th employee and left the company of over 1,000 employees 7 years later.
Eric has also worked as VP of Product Management at Operative Media, where he helped to build their best of breed Advertising Management platform, and as Director of Operations at Washingtonpost.com after spending several years doing consulting work at Price Waterhouse.
Eric has an MBA from the Tepper School of Business at Carnegie Mellon University and lives with his wife, two children, and labradoodle in Brooklyn.
Todd HenryTodd Henry is a Senior Product Manager with the IAB Tech Lab. He has 15 years of experience in the digital publishing industry working for Weather Underground, The Weather Company, and IBM. With a background in engineering and product management, Todd’s previous companies include Intuit, Brøderbund Software, and Mattel.
Michelle HeviaJeremy HlavacekAs CRO for IBM Watson Advertising, Jeremy Hlavacek is responsible for all global advertising sales efforts including premium direct sales, programmatic sales, agency partnerships and data partnerships. His teams work across Watson Advertising’s portfolio of media, data, and AI-powered technology solutions, which includes The Weather Company’s consumer platforms such as weather.com and The Weather Channel apps. Watson Advertising’s offerings help agencies and marketers improve decision-making and drive value across key facets of the marketing lifecycle – from media planning to targeting and activation to measurement and optimization.
Previously, Hlavacek was SVP, global automated monetization for The Weather Company. In that role, he oversaw all programmatic monetization efforts globally and the data partnerships team, which drives off-property data and inventory partnerships with platforms and other publishers. Hlavacek was promoted from vice president of programmatic, where he was responsible for all domestic programmatic sales efforts, platform relationships and programmatic operations. Under his leadership, the programmatic business grew 500% over a 3 year period to become one of the largest and most sophisticated sell side programmatic businesses in the industry. In 2017, AdExchanger ranked The Weather Company’s programmatic business as #2 in the industry among all publishers in media and broadcasting. Hlavacek joined Weather in early 2013 as vice president of operations and strategic partnerships for the company’s WEATHERfx division, where he oversaw technology partnerships and business operations to support the WEATHERfx business.
Prior to Weather, Hlavacek was vice president of strategy and business operations at Varick Media Management, where he helped to build one of the first programmatic trading desks on the agency side. He was responsible for strategic platform partnerships in the ad tech/real-time bidding ecosystem, as well as the business and financial operations of the company.
Hlavacek’s previous experience includes building out digital marketing and gaming experiences at LEGO Toys, directing advertising strategy and business development at Dotmenu (an online food ordering startup acquired by GrubHub/Seamless), and building out digital experiences for entertainment programming at CBS Television. On the agency side, Jeremy has held senior strategic roles at Ogilvy and Cadient Group, where he advised clients in healthcare, financial services and technology.
Hlavacek holds a master’s degree in business administration from Cornell University, a master’s degree in media and communication from the London School of Economics and Political Science, and a bachelor’s degree from the College of William and Mary.
Jesse HorwitzBorn and raised in New York, Jesse Horwitz has always had a strong grasp of economics and finance. He studied both fields at Columbia University, where he graduated Phi Beta Kappa/Magna Cum Laude. During his time at Columbia, he also developed an interest in Film Studies, although following an internship with Sony Picture’s Television Division, he quickly learned that a life in Hollywood was not for him.
Horwitz ultimately decided to take a different path, and spent a year at Harvard Law School, where he met his husband, Mark Severs and secured an internship with Bridgewater Associates. It was at Bridgewater that Jesse met his future business partner, Benjamin Cogan. Horwitz moved on from Harvard to work full time for Bridgewater and then founded Gadfly, a systematic trading firm with Michael Naber, a colleague from Bridgewater.
Horwitz joined the investment team for Columbia University’s endowment in 2013, where he spent the last few years investing across the alternatives landscape – private equity, venture capital, hedge funds and real estate. During his time at Columbia, he built a strong network across the investor community, including Two River, a life sciences merchant bank that invested in and brought together the round for Hubble.
Now Horwitz is Co-Founder and Co-CEO at Hubble, a direct-to-consumer, subscription contact lens company, where Horwitz focuses his efforts on fundraising, business development and regulation compliance. Since launching in November 2016, Hubble has become one of the fastest growing, direct-to-consumer e-commerce companies in the U.S. Horwitz and Cogan earned a spot on Forbes’ prestigious “30 Under 30” list in 2016 and Hubble recently extended its footprint into Canada, the UK and the Netherlands in the past year.
Travis HoweTravis Howe has joined ESPN as SVP, Platform Ad Sales Strategy & Global Operations. In this new role, Howe will be responsible for establishing the go-to-market strategy for ESPN’s digital advertising business moving forward to enhance the overall ESPN Platform. He will work closely with the sales marketing, product and technology teams and be based in the company’s New York office, reporting to Ed Erhardt, president, global sales & marketing.Said Erhardt, “Travis is an outstanding and creative executive who has the vision to identify, develop and execute our key priorities for the digital sales team. His expertise and thorough understanding of the evolving digital media marketplace will help enhance and drive the entirety of our portfolio.”Howe joins ESPN from Mediaocean, where he served as the executive vice president and general manager of global platform solutions. Throughout his tenure, Howe led the company’s go-to-market, cross-platform strategy, sales and client services supporting digital, cross-media and television ad sales revenue and technology for global media, entertainment and publisher companies.
Prior to Mediaocean, Howe was senior vice president, head of digital ad sales for the Americas at Sony, where he oversaw Sony’s digital entertainment division across Sony Pictures Entertainment, Sony Pictures Television, Sony Music and PlayStation. His previous roles include consulting, operational strategy and change management at Accenture.
Howe currently serves as an executive member of the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB), as well as for The Paley Center. He also serves on the Board of Directors for the Lighthouse Guild and Chairman of the Music School Advisory Board. He graduated from the University of Colorado, Boulder with a double major in finance and international business.
Scott HoweScott Howe is the Chief Executive Officer of LiveRamp (NYSE: RAMP), a software-as-a-service (SaaS) company that provides the identity platform for powering exceptional experiences. LiveRamp is the largest provider of identity resolution services, serving more than 1,000 companies across a broad range of sectors including brands, agencies, technology vendors, data providers, and publishers.From 2011 to Sept. 2018, Howe served as CEO and president of LiveRamp’s former parent company, Acxiom—a technology and services company dedicated to providing the data foundation for the world’s best marketers.
Throughout his tenure, Acxiom won countless industry awards and accolades, including recognition for the industry’s Best Innovation, Partner of the Year by the one of the world’s largest financial services companies and Supplier of the Year by the world’s largest retailer. In 2014, Fast Company named Howe one of the world’s Most Creative People.Before taking the reins at Acxiom in 2011, Howe held executive roles at Microsoft and aQuantive, where his teams built the world’s largest digital agency (Avenue A|Razorfish); pioneered people-based media buying (DRIVE Performance Media, aka the Microsoft Media Network); and developed the systems utilized for ad serving and attribution (Atlas International). He began his career at The Boston Consulting Group and Kidder, Peabody & Company, Inc.
When he’s not helping LiveRamp deploy the world’s most advanced and trusted offline and digital identity resolution technologies, Howe can be found serving as scout master for Troop 28 in Burlingame, Calif., canvassing the country in his refurbished 1956 vintage Airstream trailer or designing and building furniture in his garage workshop. A native of Milwaukee, he is a proud fan and part owner of the Green Bay Packers.Scott graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University with a degree in economics, and earned an MBA from Harvard University. He most recently served on the board of directors of Blue Nile, the largest online retailer of certified diamonds and fine jewelry, and is a former director of the Internet Advertising Bureau (IAB) and Turn, Inc., a digital advertising company.
Larry HuntLarry Hunt leads Video Investment for AT&T at Hearts and Science. Included in his responsibilities are AT&T’s Mobility, Directv and Business to Business Solutions brands in addition to Cricket Wireless.
Prior to joining the Hearts & Science, Larry was Senior Vice President, National Video Investment at Zenith. Over 14 years, Larry’s tenure focused on Verizon Wireless while working across a number of top brands including Sonic Restaurants, Hulu, Hallmark Channel, JP Morgan Chase, Darden Restaurants, and Ubisoft. Prior to Zenith Larry had spent years working at Initiative, True North and Y&R. At those agencies, Larry serviced brands such as Subaru, Jergens, American Airlines, Nortel Networks, US Army, Dr Pepper and Miller Beer.
Larry is a graduate of Baruch College and resides in Cranford, New Jersey with his wife Jennifer, daughter Isabelle and sons Owen and Harrison.
Jia HyunJia Hyun is a global marketing and digital strategy executive with a 20-year record of driving marketing innovation to generate double-digit revenue growth for Fortune 500 firms, including LinkedIn, GE Capital, Citigroup, American Express, and MasterCard International. She is a strategic leader who has created and led digital transformation initiatives, built ecommerce capabilities, and orchestrated integrated marketing teams programs and data strategies across multi-national marketing organizations.
As Vice President, Jia currently leads the sales and client services teams across North America for LinkedIn’s $2B advertising business. Jia holds a Master of Business Administration with a concentration in Marketing and Information Systems from New York University. She lives in New York with her husband and 2 boys. She is an enthusiastic amateur pickle maker and prolific home cook who balances her love of food with adventure, singing, and dancing.
Stu IngisStuart Ingis, Partner at Venable LLP, is nationally recognized as a leading attorney on privacy, marketing, advertising, eCommerce, and Internet law. He co-leads Venable’s privacy practice, which won the Chambers USA Award for Excellence for the top privacy practice and top advertising practice in the United States. He has also been repeatedly listed in the first tier of privacy attorneys in Chambers USA, Legal 500 and ComputerWorld magazine.
Mr. Ingis regularly represents companies in the media, communications, Internet, information services, advertising, and retail industries before the US Congress and the Federal Trade Commission as well as before other federal and state agencies. He defends companies in investigations by the FTC and State Consumer Protection Authorities. He regularly counsels clients on privacy and marketing issues and practices. He conducts internal assessments of company practices and products, and works with companies to design and implement compliance systems and best practices. He has represented CEOs in testimony before Congressional Committees.
Mr. Ingis brings coalitions together and leads self-regulatory efforts in the eCommerce, online, privacy, and data security space. He serves as general and policy counsel to the Direct Marketing Association, Washington advertising and privacy counsel to the Interactive Advertising Bureau, and general and policy counsel to the Digital Advertising Alliance.
Aimee IrwinAimee Irwin serves as VP of Strategy and Partnerships at Experian Marketing Services. Aimee is a skilled strategy and corporate development executive with deep experience in digital marketing and advertising and track record of success in developing and building profitable new digital and mobile businesses at both early stage and public companies. Aimee led strategic partnerships and strategic initiatives for Nielsen’s Marketing Cloud where she negotiated and managed strategic data and identity management partnerships supporting Nielsen’s data targeting and marketing effectiveness businesses. Aimee also served as SVP of Strategy and Partnerships at Verve Mobile, a leading location-based mobile advertising platform. At Verve, Aimee developed and led Verve’s mobile application business and inventory partnerships with hundreds of media companies. Prior to Verve, Aimee was VP of Strategy and Corporate Development at AOL, where she was responsible for strategic planning, mergers and acquisitions, and strategic partnerships for AOL’s advertising businesses. Previously, Aimee held executive positions at several successful internet and mobile companies including: Lightningcast, an Internet video advertising company now part of AOL, Leap Wireless, a large U.S. wireless carrier and Backwire, an internet and mobile marketing company acquired by Leap. Aimee started her career in consulting with KPMG and Bain and Company. Aimee has a BS from Georgetown University and an MBA from Kellogg.
Julie JacobsJulie Jacobs is General Counsel of Yahoo.
Julie has over two decades of experience in the global media technology industry. She is a proven leader who identifies strategic business priorities and effectively executes against them while promoting organizational culture and values and protecting consumer and company interests. In her current role, she led the integration of the Yahoo and AOL Legal Departments following the acquisition of Yahoo and is responsible for all Legal, Regulatory, Privacy and Compliance matters for Verizon Media.
Karyn JohnsonKaryn Johnson, President, US Precision, spearheads programmatic strategy, capabilities and operations across Publicis Media brands. Karyn’s eye for innovation, paired with her depth of experience in the digital, media and ad tech spaces, helps her to lead Publicis Media fearlessly into the future programmatic world on behalf of its clients.
With over 15 years of industry experience, Karyn has led innovative campaigns on strategy, digital and ad tech development teams, continuously expanding her knowledge, qualifications and ambition. In her previous role at Blue 449 as EVP, Managing Director – Digital, Karyn was instrumental in developing strategic relationships with leading media, data and technology companies for the agency. She constantly challenged her clients to think differently, and led Blue 449 client T-Mobile to become one of the most digitally savvy brands in the market.
Andy JohnsonAndy Johnson joined ALC as Chief Data Officer with responsibility for ALC’s data strategy, acquisition and operations. During his 22-year career in the data-driven marketing industry, he has held a variety of marketing, strategic and senior leadership positions with several data services powerhouses. The skills and experience he brings to ALC include managing data strategy to enable data-driven products and advertising solutions that connect data to digital media, creating a unified organization to align all data-owner relationships across platforms, brands and global teams, managing systems process and tools to produce and optimize data assets, and overseeing multi-million-dollar budgets.
Before joining ALC, Andy was most recently SVP of data and audience solutions for Acxiom/LiveRamp. Prior to Acxiom, he spent 16 years at Experian Marketing services in data solutions, acquisition and management roles. He started his data career developing strategic online alliances at Infogroup.
He received his B.S. in business administration/finance from the University of Nebraska-Lincoln. For ten years, he served in the Nebraska National Guard, receiving the Air Force Achievement Medal for distinguished service (three times). He serves on the board for IAB’s Data Center of Excellence and the Board of Advisors for Kammok. Andy is a frequently requested speaker on a broad range of topics at industry roundtables, events and universities.
Norm JohnstonNorm’s career in digital marketing began in 1995 at Modem Media, the agency that placed the first banner ad. He later launched Modem’s first international operation in London, assuming the role of President in 2004. He later joined Mindshare where he eventually became Global Chief Digital Officer, Global Chief Strategy Officer and CEO of FAST, the agency’s search and programmatic specialist division.
In 2018, Norm was named Global CEO of Unruly where he managed a premium video marketplace with 1.2b in worldwide user reach and ten offices around the globe. In 2020, Norm sold the Unruly business to Tremor International, where he is now a non-executive board director.
Norm is currently the Global Head of Advertising Strategy at News Corp, owner of The Times of London and the Wall Street Journal. When it comes to talking about all things digital, Norm’s expertise has been featured by the BBC, MSNBC, Sky News, The Economist, the Financial Times, the New York Times and all major trade publications. His first book, ‘Adaptive Marketing’, was published by Palgrave MacMillan in 2015. He lives in London with his wife and family.
Weyland JungMax KaplanSocial media guy with a craving for the next big thing. When I’m not feverishly scrolling through Twitter, I can be found at the park with my dog, in the cheapest seat at the Knicks game, or burning up at the beach!Matthew KaplanVincent KarachiraDay-to-dayVincent leads the product vision and strategy for Rakuten Marketing, designing the company’s innovative roadmap to keep pace with the swiftly evolving industry. With a team of more than 200 specialists across the business, Vincent oversees Product Operations, Product Management, Product Marketing and Corporate Strategy. Underscoring everything he does is a commitment to making things happen and creating new avenues for growth for both Rakuten Marketing and its clients.
Career historyAn entrepreneur at heart, Vincent has nearly 20 years of experience scaling software businesses through product innovation. Vincent joined Rakuten Marketing as CEO and Founder of Nextperf, the AI-based retargeting business that Rakuten Marketing acquired in 2016. He oversaw the integration of the company’s programmatic assets and laid the foundational platform its Display business is built on today. Prior to NextPerf, Vincent ran IT services and software companies and invested in start-ups across the entertainment, marketing/advertising and retail sectors.
Alma materMIT, Executive Certificate in Management and Leadership, AI, IoT, StrategyInstitute Superieur de Gestion, Master Degree in Business and FinanceFavorite quote“Innovation distinguishes between a leader and a follower” – Steve JobsOf personal noteFather of 3, Vincent has a huge passion for golf.
Anthony KatsurAnthony Katsur is an advertising technology veteran with more than two decades of executive leadership and operational experience at innovative technology companies.
As SVP of Platforms at Nexstar Digital, Anthony is responsible for leading the platform division across Mass², Kixer and Lakana, overseeing the suite of local and national digital marketing products, content monetization solutions and digital services that allow small and mid-sized media publishers and businesses to maximize revenues across every available channel.
He most recently served as President of Sonobi, where he implemented strategy, recruited and led highly effective teams and executed business with leading agencies, brands and media companies. Prior to Sonobi, Anthony held global leadership roles at Rubicon Project, MediaMath, and Maxifier, where he served as CEO. Earlier in his career, he joined DoubleClick via the acquisition of NetGravity and quickly ascended to lead multiple product, operations and engineering divisions.
Anthony is a current Investor and Advisory Board Member of Stackpop and RevCascade, and is a former Advisory Board Member of iSocket (acquired by Rubicon Project).
He is an active participant at industry conferences, speaking about the latest trends in advertising at AdAge’s Brand Summit, Advertising Week, AdMonsters and GABBCON. His thought leadership has been published in AdAge, Adweek, AdExchanger MediaPost, Econsultancy, Digiday and DMN, among others.
Bradley KayBrad is the President/Partner of SS+K â€“ a creative agency with a unique perspective on social engagement. SS+K is partially owned by Creative Artists Agency (CAA).
The firm may be best known as President Obama’s youth marketing agency for its work on both the 2008 and 2012 campaigns, as well as its involvement in the creation and marketing of the yellow wrist band for the Lance Armstrong Foundation.
Since Brad’s return to SS+K 4 years ago, he and his partners have generated year-over-year double-digit growth in revenue and profit and added Fortune 500 clients including GM, Kaplan, Kraft, and Pfizer among others. This momentum was punctuated by a Cannes Gold for Coca-Cola’s Honest Tea and an anointment as Political Agency of the Year by OMMA magazine.
This is Brad’s second tour of duty with the firm. He first joined SS+K in 1994 and stayed through 1998. Since rejoining the firm, Brad’s focus has been on SS+K’s go-to-market strategy, business development, operations, talent acquisition and retention and managing some of the firm’s larger accounts.
Prior to SS+K, Brad was the EVP/Executive Director of Draftcb’s Digital practice and a member of the New York Leadership Team.
Before this, Brad served as the GM and Co-founder of Merkley ID, the Digital and Design unit of Merkley + Partners. Brad also served as Director of Business Development at The Attik, a global digital, design and motion graphics firm working on brands including HBO, MTV and Nike.
Prior to The Attik, he held account management positions at Ogilvy, Cliff Freeman & Partners and Saatchi & Saatchi.
Brad is currently an Agency Advisory Board member to the IAB. He has spoken about the power of social media as a keynote speaker at Brazil’s “Mais” Account Planning Conference and on a panel of independent agencies at the Cannes Festival. He was featured in Departures Magazine as one of the advertising industry’s new Mod Men. He’s been a judge for the Effie’s, led panels for IAB and been a guest columnist for Adweek, MediaPost and The Hub.
Learn more here: http://about.me/bradleykayJames KelmInternet and mobile executive with over twelve years of experience, including general management, product development, business development, business operations, and strategy.
Hee Kyu KimHee Kyu Kim is an SVP, Digital Media lead, within the Customer Investment and Engagement team at Bank of America. Responsibilities include overseeing all paid digital activation across Display and Social channels for every line of business within Bank of America and Merrill.
Hee Kyu joined Bank of America in 2009, as a VP Digital Media overseeing multiple lines of businesses. Previous to joining BofA, she worked 10+ years within various advertising agencies in Boston.
Hee Kyu received her Bachelor of Science in Business Administration at the University of Vermont.
Hee Kyu resides in Boston, MA and is an active member of BIMA/MITX as well as Boston AdClub.
Joyce King-ThomasJoyce King Thomas is Chairman, Chief Creative Officer of McCannXBC, a unit focused on leading MasterCard’s global marketing efforts. She has is one of the originators of MasterCard’s priceless campaign, which runs in 100 countries and has been spoofed by everyone from Ralph Nader to Bart Simpson.
During a two-year hiatus from McCann, Joyce became a partner at Longreads, at twitter fueled social reading site. She also became a board member of the Nurse Family Partnership, a group dedicated to teaching parenting skills to young mothers living in poverty.
She has won numerous awards and served as a judge for Cannes, the One Show and the Clios. Advertising Age named Joyce one of the 100 most influential women in advertising.
Pauline KlimenkoRob KlippelRob Klippel is Senior Vice President of Advertising Products and Strategy at Spectrum Reach, the advertising sales division of Charter Communication. He oversees data platforms including insights strategy and attribution, and is responsible for advanced advertising platforms including streaming, video on demand, and digital and cross-platform addressable products.
Mr. Klippel joined Charter from Comcast where he was Vice President of Advanced Platforms, developing dynamic ad insertion on VOD and addressable platforms and prior to that he was Vice President of New Products, and of Engineering and Operations. He also served in leadership roles in customer care and operations at Adelphia, Relera and Verio. Early in his career Mr. Klippel held management consulting roles at Deloitte and Accenture.
He holds a B.S. in engineering from the University of Illinois, and an MBA in marketing and operations from the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University.
Mark KoperaMark Kopera leads the Moat Analytics Product organization at Oracle Data Cloud. Part of the Oracle Data Cloud, Moat makes brand advertising more effective by delivering software to measure and optimize media against viewability and attention, brand safety, invalid traffic, and quality.
Prior to Moat, Mark held ad tech leadership positions at Rocket Fuel, [x+1], appssavvy, and Digitas. He also advised media, retail and consumer goods companies and investors as a part of OC&C Strategy Consultants. Mark holds Bachelors and Masters degrees from Cornell University’s College of Engineering and lives in New York City.
Craig KostelicCraig Kostelic is chief business officer, revenue at Condé Nast, heading up all advertising sales across the Condé Nast portfolio.
Kostelic most recently served as the chief business officer of The Lifestyle Collection, including The Food Innovation Group (Bon Appétit and Epicurious), Architectural Digest, Condé Nast Traveler and SELF, overseeing all revenue and brand development for the collection of brands.
Previously, Kostelic served as head of revenue and head of digital for The Food Innovation Group. Under his sales and digital leadership, The Food Innovation Group hit record highs in terms of revenue, profitability and digital audience growth. Prior to his role at the Food Innovation Group, Kostelic also served as digital advertising director at Condé Nast Traveler, where he was responsible for all digital revenue streams and oversaw the launch of CNTraveler.com.
Before joining Conde Nast, Kostelic worked at Google where he was responsible for developing and managing national strategic sales for Mobile Display within the automotive vertical. Prior to Google, Craig held numerous sales and marketing roles at Microsoft and Johnson & Johnson.
Katie KulikKatie Kulik is Executive Vice President, Global Digital Sales at ViacomCBS.
Prior to becoming EVP, Global Digital Sales, Kulik was the Global Senior Vice President of Sales and Marketing for CBS Interactive’s Tech, Games, Lifestyle and Business groups. For the renowned brands CNET, GameSpot, Chow, Last.fm and others, Kulik leads global revenue and product marketing and directs agency and client media strategy and implementation. A veteran sales and marketing executive, Kulik is an expert in premium digital media and understands how to connect brands with customers anywhere.
In her role as Global Senior Vice President Kulik directed a worldwide team of more than 100 sales and product-marketing professionals dedicated to building major campaigns for brands across CBSi’s ecosystem of screens, from online to mobile and social platforms. Kulik has designed innovative marketing programs for nearly every major technology and CE brand, as well as major auto, CPG, and retail industries.
Kulik’s other expertise lies in change management, helping sales and marketing teams rapidly adjust to – and embrace – the ever-changing digital landscape and the resulting implications on consumer buying habits.
Prior to joining CBS Interactive she was in ad sales with the Motley Fool.
She earned a bachelors degree in Economics and Psychology from Lake Forest College and lives with her husband and daughters in Tiburon, CA.
Alexandra LamAlexandra Lam has over ten years of experience in a variety of roles within the digital media landscape. She has provided guidance and support to industries ranging from media production to hospitality.
Chris LaSalaWith a decade of experience Chris LaSala is a seasoned veteran in the digital media space. Chris currently heads Google’s mobile publisher business development efforts where he works with established media brands as well as the emerging mobile application developer community. Prior to this role, Chris held roles leading a channel program aimed at delivering Google’s advertising solutions to local business and leading Google’s North American advertising agency strategy.
Prior to joining Google, Chris held the roles of director of business development at Looksmart where he was responsible for developing partnerships for the distribution of LookSmart’s advertising and search solutions, and strategy development consultant at Strategic Decisions Group, where he advised clients in the oil and gas and technology industries on making multi-billion dollar investments. Chris began his career as a public accountant for five years at Coopers & Lybrand. Chris holds a bachelor of science from Boston College and an MBA from Duke University.
Mike LawMike Law is currently Executive Vice President, Managing Director, Video Investment for Dentsu Aegis Network. In this role, Mike oversees TV and Digital video strategy and investments across the agencies clients as well as leading greater convergence internally at the agency and advancing the adoption of new, advanced advertising platforms. Mike oversees more than $4B in annual video spending across many clients including Microsoft, GM, Home Depot, Pfizer, Macy’s, Reckitt Benckiser, MasterCard, Staples, Sony, Dannon, Outback, Disney and Diageo.
Formerly, Mike was Director of Media Strategy and TV Investments for Pfizer where he handled consumer media strategy for their DTC brands as well as managing the portfolios $600MM+ TV and digital video investments. Previously, Mike was a Media Buyer at Carat and Arnold.
Nick LawAs Global Chief Creative Officer, Nick is responsible for the creative vision of R/GA, the New York-based agency for the digital age. He guides teams of visual designers, copywriters and experience designers as they create award-winning work for a many of Fortune 500 companies. He also ensures that R/GA stays true to the company’s unique legacy of collaboration between world-class creative and groundbreaking technology.
Nick’s background is extensive and diverse, spanning multiple marketing disciplines during 20 years at agencies in the United States and abroad. He began his career in branding and corporate identity and design before switching to advertising, and then ultimately, focusing on digital marketing.
Nick has won every major industry awards, including a Titanium Lion and Grand Prix Cyber Lion at Cannes, and a prestigious Black Pencil from D&AD. Three times he has been named in Creativity Magazine’s “Creativity 50”, a list of the world’s most influential creatives.
Edward LeahyEd Leahy is the Senior Director of data sales and solutions for Lotame, a global marketing technology company that through its leading Data Management Platform (DMP), helps publishers, advertisers and agencies navigate the growing challenge around managing audience data. Ed joined Lotame in 2016 to spearhead data solutions sales efforts across North American agencies and trading desks. Prior to joining Lotame, Ed held positions in business development at iBehavior (KBM Group) and Mariah Media Network. He started his advertising career on the agency side of the business, working for WPP’s GroupM in several client facing roles.
Daryl LeeDaryl Lee is the Global CEO of IPG Mediabrands, the media and marketing solutions division of Interpublic Group (NYSE: IPG), made up of the network’s best-in-class global media agencies UM and Initiative, and a portfolio of innovative marketing specialist companies, namely Reprise, Magna, Orion, Rapport, Healix, Mediabrands Content Studio and the IPG Media Lab. In his role, Lee is responsible for the strategic and commercial leadership and performance of the Mediabrands global network.
Lee has held a series of roles with increasing responsibility at IPG. Most recently, he was the global CEO of UM, revolutionizing the agency into an award-winning global powerhouse with a roster of iconic and fast-growing clients. Relentlessly client focused, Lee fostered a culture at UM that believes “Better Science and Better Art delivers Better Outcomes.” His inclusive leadership style fueled UM’s momentum, resulting in countless new and expanded client relationships with globally recognized brands including American Express, BMW, Coca-Cola, Johnson & Johnson, Sony and Spotify.
Lee’s strategic vision positioned UM at the forefront of media transformation, attaining industry leader status on Forrester’s first-ever Wave report on the media agency landscape in 2018. Lee originally joined UM in 2006, as the Head of Global Strategy. During that time, he built the Communications Planning Practice across global clients including Coca-Cola, Johnson & Johnson, MasterCard, Microsoft and Sony. He then joined McCann Worldgroup as Chief Integration Architect, eventually becoming Global Chief Strategy Officer responsible for working across all McCann offices to ensure clients received integrated brand solutions customized to their business challenges. In 2013, Lee returned to UM in the role of Global CEO.
Prior to IPG, Lee spent six years at Ogilvy, where he was Group Director of the Marketing Strategy Group and the 360 Strategy Director for the global IBM account. Lee began his career as a consultant for McKinsey & Company in the New York office.
Lee’s career is driven by his passion for marketing, endless curiosity, respect for the power of storytelling and commitment to positive social change. He is a vocal champion for diversity, equity and inclusion in the world and the workplace. He currently sits on the board of the economic empowerment non-profit STRIVE and is a former board member of the Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation (GLAAD). Daryl is also on the Board of Directors of Effie Worldwide, sits on the Facebook Client Council and Twitter Influence Council and has been a juror for multiple awards including the inaugural Creative Effectiveness Cannes Lions.
Daryl graduated with a D. Phil from the University of Oxford, which he attended as a Rhodes Scholar, and in 2016 was named Executive of the Year by AdWeek and was honored by Advertising Age as a Media Maven for 2015.
Russell LeFevreRich LeFurgyRich LeFurgy has been a board member, advisor or investor in over 55 online advertising companies, drawing from over a 30 year career in advertising. LeFurgy was Founding Chairman of the IAB and sfBIG, a Venture Capitalist (WaldenVC), head of ad sales at Starwave (ESPN.com) and the Walt Disney Internet Group. Prior to Starwave, LeFurgy had a 17 year career at traditional ad agency NWAyer in New York, working on clients AT&T, Proctor & Gamble, Avon, Gillette and Dupont, among others.
He started online advertising business accelerator Archer in 2004, helping early stage online advertising companies reach takeoff velocity with strategic advisory services in fundraising, trade marketing and sales. LeFurgy received ad:tech’s Industry Achievement Award (2008), the IAB’s Lifetime Achievement Award (2004), was inducted into Advertising Age’s Interactive Hall of Fame (2000). He was recognized by USA Today as the “Johnny Appleseed of online advertising”.
LeFurgy has served on company boards as a director, including Blue Lithium and Associated Content (both sold to Yahoo!) and Web Clients (sold to ValueClick), and is currently on the board of Placecast. He has also provided advisory services to large and small online advertising companies (Google, AOL, Blue Lithium, Glam, and Placecast) and has personally invested in a number of promising online advertising startups, such as Klout, Ad Relevance (sold to Nielsen NetRatings), Grouper/Crackle (sold to Sony) and Blue Lithium (sold to Yahoo!), among others.
Tyler LettichTyler joins IAB from Adweek where he served as Director, Programming and Events where he led the event and programming team strategy, including oversight of topic ideation, speaker recruitment, moderator preparation for more than 40+ events. Tyler started his career at Argyle producing 1-day CMO Forums and later moved to the Innovative Enterprise business when the company tripled its size through acquisitions. At Innovation Enterprise, he developed large scale 2-day multi-themed programs for marketing, advertising, and media executives. Tyler has a passion for marketing, advertising, and media. For Tyler, there’s nothing more exciting than pitching a potential speaker and getting the win! He has a passion for creating programs and delivering enticing and relevant content for audiences. Tyler earned his B.A. in Communications and Public Relations from William Paterson University.
Helen LinA catalyst of innovation, a pioneer in programmatic, a collaborative industry partner, and fierce champion for diversity and inclusion, Helen Lin is Chief Digital Officer for Publicis Media.
Helen oversees digital strategy, partnerships, investment and negotiations on behalf of Publicis globally, represents the Groupe in industry-leading initiatives including improving digital brand safety standards and the overall safety on today’s largest consumer platforms. Helen enables our clients including Disney, Verizon, Kellogg’s, Lowes, Coty, GSK, and many others, to remain at the forefront of the rapidly, evolving digital ecosystem.
Helen’s professional focus goes beyond client & agency work. She is the founding Executive Sponsor of Publicis Media’s Women’s Business Resource Group POW! (Power of Women!), and on the board of Asians in ADCOLOR. She is also an active board member for Partnership with Children, a non-profit that helps over 10,000 NYC school children overcome the stresses of growing up in poverty. Helen earned her bachelor’s degree at UCLA and her MBA at NYU Stern.
James LinneyJohn LiskoAdam LowyKris MagelKristian (Kris) Magel serves as President, DAN Media Clients for Dentsu Aegis.
A veteran with nearly two decades of experience in the media business, Kris has proven himself a formidable negotiator who has earned the respect of media partners for both his analytical approach to the marketplace and his passionate representation of clients. His reputation for articulate, informed intelligence also makes him a favorite with the press and a popular panelist at industry events. In 2012 Magel was named to the Adweek 50 (#16) as one of the industry’s most influential executives and was a Mediaweek ‘Media All-Star’ in 2007. Magel also has an influential voice within the video industry, serving as a co-chair of the Ad Council Broadcast TV Committee, a member of the advisory boards of industry collective Videonomics and Advertiser Perceptions and a board member of the New York Advertising Club.
Kris received his Bachelors of Arts degree from the John Wiley School of Business at the State University of New York at Geneseo. He makes his home with his family in New York City and East Hampton, New York.
Jean-Philippe (JP) MaheuJean-Philippe (JP) Maheu is the VP of US Client Services at Twitter, where he leads Twitter’s relationships with its top marketers and manages a team of industry & regional leaders. Prior to this role, JP launched the Global Brands team at Twitter and led the global expansion of Twitter Brand Strategy and Agency Development teams.
Maheu joined Twitter in 2013 through the acquisition of SocialTV analytics company Bluefin Labs, where he was CEO. Under JP’s leadership, Bluefin achieved remarkable sales traction with leading brands and strengthened its market leading position.
Prior to Bluefin Labs, JP served as the Global CEO of Publicis Modem, the digital marketing unit of Publicis Worldwide. Maheu also held positions as both the Chief Digital Officer of Ogilvy & Mather, where he was responsible for digital growth and innovation across the company’s operating units, and CEO of Razorfish, where he led the vision, strategy and growth of the company.
JP holds a MBA from J.L. Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University and a M.S. in Network & Computer Sciences from Pierre et Marie Curie University in Paris, France. He sits on the boards of the IAB, the Mobile Marketing Association, and the NY Chapter of The Nature Conservancy, and lives in NYC with his wife and two children.
Jason MaltbyJason began his career in 1988 buying media for political campaigns. He joined DMB&B in 1989working on accounts such as GM, Kraft general Foods and P&G. Jason joined Ogilvy & Mather in 1993 asAssociate Media Director, working on Hershey, Ryder, Mattel, Duracell, and Sandoz Pharmaceutical(later Novartis Consumer Health Group). He soon rose to Group Director, National Broadcast at Ogilvy,and was named President, Managing Director in 2000 with Mindshare’s launch in the US.
In 2002, Jason was named Media Buyer of the Year by Electronic Media. In 2005, Jason was named aMedia All-Star for National TV/Cable by AdWeek magazine. Jason has also served as Chairperson of the4A’s National Audio/Video committee.
Jason graduated from Gettysburg College (Pennsylvania) with a B.A. in English Literature, and washonored by Gettysburg with the Young Alumni Career Achievement Award in 2003. He lives in Chatham,New Jersey with his wife, Betsy, and their three children, Sean, Megan, and James. He is an avid readerand enjoys fishing, hiking and travel.
Jake MarxRob MasterRob Master is Vice President of Media and Digital Engagement for North America at Unilever. He oversees a team responsible for media innovation, strategy and the development of integrated communication plans for all Unilever brands. Under Rob’s leadership Unilever has been recognized as Digital Marketer of the Year by Advertising Age, Media Client of the Year by Media Post and one of Fast Company’s Most Innovative Marketers.
Rob joined Unilever in 2002 as a brand marketer, managing a number of the company’s iconic brands, including Dove and Axe, and driving award-winning branding campaigns.
Prior to joining Unilever, Rob worked in brand marketing for PepsiCo’s Taco Bell and for various communication agencies, as well as two start-ups.
He holds a B.A. in political science from the University of Wisconsin at Madison and an M.B.A. from the Olin School of Business at Washington University in St. Louis.
Ai MatsubaraMs. Ai Matsubara works closely with Yahoo! JAPAN’s executive management team to optimize business strategy. Prior to becoming a board of director of IAB Tech Lab, over 10 years of Video Ads product development experience with progressively increasing leadership responsibility through Vice President in Yahoo! JAPAN.
Brian MatthewsBrian Matthews leads the national advertising sales team for the NFL Media group. He oversees the ad sales responsibilities for the NFL Network, NFL RedZone and the NFL Digital portfolio.
Prior to joining the NFL, Matthews was the Senior Vice President of national sales for the NBC News Digital Group. He previously served as the Vice President for the NBC Entertainment team delivering innovative advertising solutions across digital properties such as NBC, Bravo, Oxygen, USA and Syfy. Before joining NBC, Matthews led East Coast sales for the BBC America cable network and the BBC digital properties where he helped create the first BBC sales team in the U.S. marketplace. He also spent seven years at Turner Broadcasting representing CNN Digital, and began his sales career at Scripps Interactive.
Matthews is a graduate of St. Bonaventure University and resides in Chatham, New Jersey with his wife and four children.
Mainak MazumdarMainak is a Data Science executive with 20+ years experience in consumer, media, and marketing tech. As the Chief Data and Research Officer of Nielsen Company, Mainak leads the Data Science, Identity Solutions and AI initiatives. He is responsible for developing audience measurement methodologies and product development. Mainak is passionate about scaling businesses with AI, developing talent and delivering results. Prior to Nielsen, Mainak held Data Science leadership roles with GfK, Simulmedia, and Google (DoubleClick).
He completed his masters and doctoral studies from Brown University. Mainak is a member of the General Assembly’s Data Science Standard Board and a steering committee member of the University of Chicago Booth Business School’s Kilts Center of Marketing.
Jodie McAfeeJodie McAfee is Senior Vice President, Sales & Marketing at Inscape, a leading provider of automatic content recognition (ACR) technologies and comprehensive cross-screen metrics for broadcasters and advertisers.
A media and marketing veteran, Jodie has led the strategic execution for advanced video advertising, interactive TV and content acquisition initiatives for more than two decades.
Prior to Inscape, Jodie was General Manager at Samsung AdHub, where he led the development and introduction of Samsung’s multi-screen advertising platform across US and European markets, while overseeing many of Samsung’s partnerships with major agencies and Fortune 500 brands both domestically and internationally.
Previous to Samsung, Jodie was involved in the creation and operation of multiple emerging companies with expertise in connected TV, iTV and advanced advertising. Jodie resides in Brooklyn, is a graduate of The University of Texas and earned a Juris Doctor degree in Entertainment Law from Whittier University.
Ryan McConvilleKirk McDonaldOne of the “50 vital leaders in tech, media and marketing,” according to Adweek, Kirk is the CEO of GroupM North America (NA) where he leads 6,500 people passionate about shaping the next era of media where advertising works better for people. A member of GroupM’s Global Leadership Team, he is a key player in championing GroupM’s strategy to work with agency and GroupM leadership in the region to use its scale in providing more powerful and effective solutions for clients through the development of technology-enabled services.
With $17.6 billion in media investment billings across the U.S. and Canada, GroupM owns a 22% market share in the world’s largest region. Kirk is particularly driven to help GroupM lead the way in driving real change across the industry to find a new balance of making advertising less interruptive and a valued part of the media experience. He also believes that, as the desire for brands to play their part in leading the way toward real change grows stronger, GroupM is the one to help clients be authentic and bold in this moment. Kirk served as the Global CEO of Choreograph, and was responsible for launching WPP’s global data company which brought together over 700 technologists, product developers, and data scientists. Kirk and Choreograph focused on helping marketers and brands realize the value of their first party data in the fast-changing data landscape.
Kirk joined GroupM from WarnerMedia’s Xandr where he most recently served as Chief Business Officer in charge of the go to market functions including sales, communications, product marketing, and marketing strategy and execution after holding the role of Chief Marketing Officer for nearly two years. Prior to AT&T, Kirk was President of PubMatic, the marketing automation software company, and held roles with Time Inc., Fortune|Money Group and CNET Networks, among others.
Throughout his career, Kirk received many accolades including being named to Ebony Magazine’s Power 100 list in 2018, Adweek’s 2014 “12 Stars of Ad Tech Who are Building the Future of the Industry Right Now’ list and Business Insider’s 2014 “The 46 Most Important African-Americans in Technology” list, among others. Kirk is a founding member of the Black Executive CMO Alliance (BECA). He currently serves on the Board of Directors for Elanco (NYSE: ELAN), and is a member of the prestigious Executive Leadership Council. Healso serves on several other professional and not-for-profit boards including the Ad Council, Advertising Week Advisory Council, and is the co-chair of MOUSE/CI.
Kevin McGurnKevin McGurn is Vevo’s Chief Sales Officer. He joins Vevo from Fullscreen, where he served as Head of Sales for the company as well as Otter Media properties including Crunchyroll, Roster Teeth SoompiTV and VRV. Prior to Fullscreen, Kevin was Chief Revenue Officer of Shazam. He previously served as Senior Vice President of Sales at Hulu for nearly seven years, where he grew the sales team from zero to half a billion dollars in advertising revenue. Kevin has also held prior senior roles at NBC Universal and DoubleClick.
Adam McKinneyAdam is SVP – Associate General Counsel for Xandr where he provides legal guidance on technology, product, data, and privacy issues. In his current role, he advises Xandr on the responsible collection and use of data to make advertising matter. Prior to joining Xandr, AT&T’s advertising company, in 2018, Adam was the lead attorney at AT&T for privacy and data protection issues, as well as AT&T’s data analytics unit. Over a 20 year career at AT&T, he has held a wide variety of roles at AT&T, many of them focused on product and data issues. He has a BBA in Management Science from Southern Methodist University and his JD from Baylor University. He offices in New York City.
Noel McMichaelNoel McMichael is Vice President for Strategic Initiatives and Public Sector at LiveRamp (NYSE: RAMP), the leading connectivity platform for the safe and effective use of data.
Responsible for delivering growth in new market verticals that are making investments in identity resolution strategy, he also oversees strategy for public policy initiatives and helps to ensure LiveRamp solutions are interoperable and compliant with evolving industry regulations and privacy laws. An innovator and product evangelist for over 20 years, McMichael has had an illustrious career in the digital marketing industry, having worked with hundreds of the world’s leading brands and startups to bridge the gap between technology and business.
Before joining LiveRamp, McMichael was Vice President of Product at Acxiom, a leader in identity and customer data management, where he played an instrumental role in the company’s acquisition of LiveRamp and soon after, the formation of the Advertising ID Consortium. His extensive industry experience also includes founding two startups – real-time analytics and demand-side platform Adgile and SEO/SEM company Marketleap. He was also a part of the leadership team at Right Media, the world’s first ad exchange and a pioneer of programmatic media. McMichael has been awarded two patents over the course of his professional tenure, most recently for developing a method to analyze website visitors using anonymized behavioral prediction models.
Throughout his expansive career, McMichael has maintained a passion for mentorship. He currently sits on the board of the IAB Data Center of Excellence and Advertising ID Consortium and was a co-founding board member of the Search Engine Marketers Professional Organization (SEMPO). He holds a bachelor’s degree in political science and international studies from the University of Texas at Arlington.
Maggie MeadeMaggie co-founded Sibling Rivalry in 2011 with partners Joe Wright and Mikon van Gastel. Creating a hybrid company that at its core is based in design and storytelling for brands and networks. Maggie oversees all the sales and operations of the company.
Maggie comes from a career as an Executive Producer from awarded companies such as @radical media and Droga5. While at Droga5, she produced and branded various award-winning multimedia projects, including the “Tap Project,” where she won the first Titanium Lion at the Cannes International Advertising Festival.
Maggie rarely has down time and prefers to have a full social calendar at all times, as people give her energy. She resides in downtown NYC with her husband and daughter.
David MooreNigel MorrisNigel Morris was appointed CEO of Aegis Media Americas in 2011 having held the position of CEO, Aegis Media North America from May 2009. In June 2012 Nigel was additionally appointed CEO of Aegis Media EMEA. From 2003 until 2009, Nigel was the founder CEO of Isobar, and led its rapid expansion into the world’s leading digital services agency network. Prior to this Nigel held a range of senior positions in Carat International. He joined Aegis Media in 1992 having previously worked in fashion, corporate identity and branding consultancy. Nigel is also Chairman of the Aegis Group plc Sustainability Committee and leads the future product offering and service delivery strategy for Aegis Media.
Alan MossAlan Moss is Vice President, Global Advertising Sales at Amazon. His efforts are focused on helping businesses around the world engage customers and build their brands.
Prior to Amazon, Alan spent 13 years at Google, where he most recently served as Vice President of Professional Services supporting advertisers and publishers globally. Other roles included leading Google’s largest U.S. customer sales sector, as well as its Americas mid-market sales organization.
Alan has also held leadership positions at other technology and internet-based companies, including PayPal, ChartOne, Inc., GoTo Shopping (acquired by Yahoo!), CareTools, Wang Laboratories, Microsoft, and LEK Consulting.
Alan earned a bachelor’s degree from Dartmouth College and an MBA from Harvard Business School. He lives in the Bay Area with his wife, Kirsten, and their son and two daughters.
Matt MurphyMatt Murphy is partner and Group Creative Director at 72andSunny, where he helps lead the company’s commitment to experimentation with art, technology, and entertainment.
During his five and half years at 72andSunny, he’s worked across many brands, including the iconic collaboration between K-Swiss and Kenny Powers of HBO’s “Eastbound and Down” to create “Kenny Powers, MFCEO” as well as creating the fully integrated launch campaign for Call of Duty: Black Ops 2.
He currently leads the creative charge on all things Google, including the relaunch of the Google’s Search App which invited New Yorkers to rediscover their city through bespoke OOH placements all throughout the city; YouTube’s Proud to Play film, which celebrated equality in sports during the World Cup; and the recent Made With Code: Holiday Lights project, which gave Google’s initiative to get teenage girls into coding a national stage at the White House Christmas Tree Lighting Ceremony.
Prior to 72andSunny, Matt spent three years at Wieden+Kennedy in Portland working on Nike and EA.
John MuszynskiA 30-plus year veteran and legend in the media world, John Muszynski is the Chief Investment Officer at Spark, and leads all negotiating on behalf of our client’s brands in order to deliver media savings and the best pricing in the marketplace. Not only does John oversee the buying team for Spark, he also leads the Starcom MediaVest Group Exchange (which we call SMGx). John’s SMGx team helps our entire network drive innovation in advanced media and technology while gathering marketplace intelligence across SMG’s $16 Billion in media spending.
Prior to joining Spark and SMGx, John served as CEO of Starcom USA (2005 – 2009), helping build a company at the forefront of leveraging media partnerships to strengthen the brands of some of the world’s biggest marketers. Under his leadership, Starcom was named Ad Age Agency of the Year (2006-07), Media magazine Media Agency of the Year (2005-07) – and was the first media agency to ever make Ad Age’s A List (2007).
John has received numerous honors for his work in the industry, including Advertising Age’s Media Maven, TV Week’s Buyer of the Year as well as a Mediaweek All-Star, min’s Most Intriguing People in Media and Kidscreen Golden Marble Award for Best Media Director. Most recently, John was inducted into the Broadcasting & Cable Hall of Fame, securing his status as an industry icon.
Kunal NagpalKunal Nagpal serves as the GM – Publisher Platforms for InMobi driving both revenue and product strategy for InMobi’s publishing business and premium media exchange. Before that, Kunal was Vice President of Client Services at InMobi, where he oversaw account management for thousands of advertiser clients. Prior to InMobi, Kunal spent a number of years at McKinsey and Co., where he worked with Fortune 500 clients on cross-regional board-level strategy, operations and risk discussions for the U.S., Europe and Australia regionsHannah NardoneHannah joined the IAB in November of 2018. She serves as a Member Services Manager with a focus in post-sales. Hannah is an alumna of Villanova University and holds a Bachelor’s degree in Economics and Classical Studies.
Peter NaylorPeter Naylor is Vice President of Americas at Snap, responsible for driving the growth of the company’s advertising business across the United States, Canada and Mexico. Previously, Peter served as SVP and Head of Advertising Sales at Hulu, where he worked for over six years. Prior to Hulu, Peter was EVP of Digital Media Sales for NBCUniversal (NBCU) where he ran digital advertising sales for NBCU’s entertainment, news and sports digital properties. Before NBCU, Peter served as the SVP of Sales for the iVillage Properties, which was acquired by NBCU in May 2006. Prior to joining iVillage, he served as Vice President of Sales for Terra Lycos. He started his internet sales career at Wired Digital. He serves on the Board of Directors for the IAB, the IRTS Foundation and the TD Foundation, an not-for-profit organization that provides aid to children of wounded warriors.
Goksu Nebol-PerlmanDiana NegronKristoffer NelsonKristoffer Nelson is the COO and Director of SRAX and principal for BIGtoken. As a founding team member, Kristoffer has been pivotal in growing SRAX into a multinational digital marketing and data management platform company listed on Nasdaq.
With over 15 years of technology and creative business experience, Kristoffer has been a guest speaker for Loyola Marymount University among other academic institutions, the National Association of Broadcasters, the IAB and numerous other professional and media organizations. Kristoffer is also a frequent contributor to many publications in advertising, blockchain, and crypto news and information.
Derek NicolJohn NittiJohn Nitti joined Zenith in 2009. His goal was to build ZenithInteractive, the full-service digital media arm of the agency, from the ground up. In less than a year, John brought in more than 50 new hires and 10 new clients—increasing digital billings from $3MM to $180MM.
Since then, John’s leadership has continued to change and grow the agency. In 2010 the Digital and Magazine divisions were merged to offer clients a more robust, content-centric approach to media. Two years later, John was promoted to the newly created position of President of Activation, where he was charged with trading, investment, execution, and activation for all Zenith craftskills. In that capacity, John formed the National Video group in 2012 to bring together linear, digital, and mobile video. The latest implementation, in 2013, was the full integration of all aspects of Local Activation (Broadcast, Print, OOH, and Digital).
That same year also saw the creation of the Activation Standards, Insights and Technology group to complete John’s reimagining of Zenith Activation. With the creation of this group, Zenith is now structured to implement buying standards and strategic partnerships and technology platforms that apply to all genres of media and across all of its clients. This group, driven by John’s vision, helps continue to put Zenith in an industry leading position of driving the marketplace for fluidity and ensures Zenith is a respected leader in the measurement, programmatic and technology space.
John’s vision for the Zenith Activation group has brought about tremendous impact for the agency. His Activation Team now includes over 300 staff members across North America and manages clients’ media investments of over $10B (2013). John is the architect of Zenith’s fluid video approach for reaching consumers across multiple screens. He has also been a guiding force in the creation of strategic partnerships that drive cross-platform innovation and measurement.
Fueled by a drive for innovation and a desire to evolve the media marketplace, John was promoted to Chief Investment Officer of Zenith in September of 2014. In this position, John will continue his oversight of the Zenith Activation teams while adding many key initiatives for Publics Groupe and the ZO Agency Network (Zenith, Optimedia, Moxie and Performics) to his remit.
Prior to joining Zenith, John was Director of U.S. Media & Sponsorships at American Express for six years, where he was responsible for developing and overseeing traditional and digital media planning and strategy efforts across various business areas for the company.
In addition to his work at Zenith and American Express, John has held posts at Young & Rubicam, Time Inc. and Dentsu. He has over 16 years of experience in media planning, buying, and sales.
John holds a Bachelor of Science in marketing and finance from Wagner College. He resides on Staten Island, New York, with his wife Noelle and their two sons.
Kim NorrisKim Norris is a senior cable advertising and media executive with over 20 years of experience in general management leading sales, strategy and new ad technology products and data solutions for multiple cable operators. As Group Vice President, Digital & Advanced Advertising Sales, Kim is responsible for leading the sales teams in the Northeast and a robust enterprise wide digital business. An industry thought leader and innovator; Norris has established a record of success running both traditional media sales and incubating and deploying transformative new advertising products at the convergence of media, technology and data.
Prior to Joining Spectrum Reach, Norris was Chief Operating Officer for Viamedia and worked with the company’s 60 MVPD partners across the US on both traditional and OTT and mobile streaming and programmatic advertising monetization with local, regional and national advertisers in 70 DMA’s across the country. While at Viamedia, she successfully launched an addressable platform with Google Fiber in Kansas City and led the company’s programmatic TV platform placemedia.
Previously, Norris held senior sales and product roles at both Comcast and Cablevision. As EVP of Emerging Business & Data Analytics at Cablevision, Norris drove the advanced advertising product roadmap and commercial strategy for set top box data and addressable and interactive television advertising that established Cablevision as an advertising industry leader and innovator. At Comcast she was a Division Vice President for the Northeast television markets following Comcast’s acquisition of ATT Cable. Norris also served as the founding President of the DPAA (Digital Place-based Advertising Association) in the digital out-of-home advertising industry.
Norris has served on advisory committees for television and digital industry groups and several technology companies. Multichannel News and Women in Cable Telecommunications (WICT) named her a “Wonder Woman” in 2013. She is a Cynopsis 2016 ‘Top Women in Digital” and has been recognized by Cablefax as a “Top Woman in Cabletech” 2011-2016 and is a WICT Betsey Magness Fellow. In 2010, she received the “Most Significant Product or Platform” award from ITVT for leadership in interactive and multiplatform television.
Janet NorthenJanet was one of the first to apply strategic corporate communications to build agency brands. She was The Martin Agency’s first director of agency communications and held the same post later at Fallon and again in 1999 when she joined McKinney. Her work has earned international media for the agency’s talked-about work in the marketplace. In 2009, Janet inspired the formation of the Interactive Advertising Bureau’s Agency Advisory Board that serves as the voice of creativity to its publisher members. She has chaired the 4A’s Agency Communications Committee and is on the board of the UNC School of Journalism and Mass Communication.
Dale OlderDale has served as the Chief Product Officer for Integral Ad Science since 2018, bringing 20 years of product and technology experience to the role. As head of product, Dale sets the strategic direction and roadmap for IAS’ market-leading suite of measurement, verification, and optimization solutions.
Dale has held a variety of roles in engineering, corporate development, and product. Dale joined Integral from AOL Advertising where he was VP of audience data products. Prior to that, he led product development and M&A for AOL’s mobile advertising business. Dale spent his early career in consulting as an engineer for CGI Group, followed by Discovery Communications where he managed programs to transform Discovery’s digital media and advertising technology.
Dale holds a BS in Information Systems from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
Michael PalmerMichael Palmer is originally from a small town in upstate New York. As an undergraduate at Vassar College he majored in history and political science and holds advanced degrees from Cornell, Harvard and the Stern School of Business. Prior to settling into a career in software development, Michael had previously worked a wide variety of jobs, including being a college lecturer, a wilderness guide and a factory shift manager. After working for several years as a software product manager for a clinical trial software, Michael helped found a small business intelligence company, where he ran operations. After selling and successfully exiting this company, Michael joined GroupM via Xaxis where he has worked for the last five years in several technology-related roles. He is currently GroupM’s global Vice President for Emerging Technologies.
Nicolle PangisAs Ampersand CEO, Nicolle Pangis and her team are working to build a smarter, more effective television ecosystem by empowering brands to seamlessly connect with audiences wherever and whenever they watch TV. Pangis previously served as Global COO at GroupM’s [m]PLATFORM where she led global product management, strategic partnerships and technology development across the largest media investment management organization in the world. Prior to [m]PLATFORM, Pangis was a central figure in the success of pioneering programmatic advertising company, Xaxis, serving first as Global Chief Revenue Officer, followed by Global COO. Earlier, she was President of 24/7 Real Media where she led the company’s business in North America and Europe. Nicolle is a member of the Ad Council Board of Directors and has been named to the Adweek 50 list, AdAge’s 40 Under 40, Crain’s 40 Under 40, and Multichannel News’ Women to Watch. She was recently awarded AdExchanger’s 2020 Leadership in Advertising award. She received her bachelor’s degree in communication from Boston University and her MBA from Rutgers University.
Todd ParsonsTodd Parsons is the Chief Product Officer at OpenX, where he leads a global team and is responsible for planning, implementation and go-to-market strategy across the company’s entire portfolio of products including display, mobile app and video. In his position, Todd focuses on creating advertising products at the intersection of consumer identity and data, and positioning OpenX to build programmatic solutions that allow publishers and brands to capitalize on the massive shifts in consumer behavior, regulation, and advertising itself.
Prior to OpenX, Todd was responsible for leading all product at SocialCode, across social, mobile, video and more. Todd also previously worked at Acxiom, leading product for the company’s core $330 million Marketing Services business, and founded two venture-backed startups; Aditive, acquired by Acxiom in 2014, and BuzzLogic, the first Saas platform for social media analytics and advertising.
John PatroulisJohn’s career began as a copywriter in New York City at TBWA\Chiat\Day, NY, where he created campaigns for a diverse roster of clients, including Nextel, Absolut, Samsonite, and Bic. With efforts that included multiple awardwinning television campaigns, and such nontraditional work as a limited edition fashion collector’s piece for Absolut and a billboard that blistered and faded for the Skin Cancer Foundation, his work received some of the highest creative honors in the industry.
In 2004, John moved west and joined the TBWA/Chiat/Day office in San Francisco and went on to lead award winning campaigns for another large variety of clients, including, most notably, adidas, Fox Sports Net, and Motorola. With more high profile, gold pencil and lion winning campaigns including the first ‘viral’ video to receive top honors by the AICP John helped TBWA/Chiat/Day SF become one the most awarded offices in the world.
In 2007, he left to help launch T.A.G. SF. As global creative lead on Xbox, his first year resulted in the Halo 3 “Believe” campaign. With it’s unique approach to integrated storytelling, it became the most creatively awarded campaign of the decade, garnering top honors at every major international award shows including the Integrated Titanium Grand Prix and Film Grand Prix at Cannes, Best in Show at the One Show, Grandy, Grand Clio, Grand Effie, the Art Director’s Club, Addy’s, D&AD, AICP, and more. Once released, Halo 3 become the biggest launch in entertainment history. This and other content driven successes led John to cofound agency two fifteen in 2010 in San Francisco, where he served as ECD/Partner. With it’s continued award winning global Xbox success joined by the social media driven content launch of the Kin phone among other campaigns, agency two fifteen celebrated it’s first birthday by being named to Creativity’s “Alist”, placing it among the 10 most creative agencies in the world.
In summer of 2011, John accepted the role of Chief Creative Officer at BBH New York. One year later the agency was named to Creativity’s “AList” for the first time in it’s history. With integrated campaigns for clients like Playstation, Axe, Google and Cole Haan it has grown to become one of the most awarded agencies in NYC, and was recently named one of Creativity’s “Innovators of the Year” in 2014, “One to Watch” by Adage, and was the only agency in North America to win Gold Cannes lions in both the Film and Cyber categories at the 2014 festival. For this and other efforts, John was recently named one of the “Adweek 50”, the annual list of the top 50 innovators and influencers in marketing. And in January of 2015, he was named BBH’s first ever Creative Chairman in New York.
Over his career John has received every single top international creative honor several times over, including the One Show Best in Show, Grand Clio, The Grandy, and the Cannes Grand Prix, which he has won twice.
Catherine PattersonCatherine Patterson serves as Director of Experiences and branded content, for VMLY&R North America, where she leads teams in identifying, architecting and developing branded content platforms and experiences for all clients, with a focus on the crossroads of culture and technology.
Her work has received highest honors worldwide with multi-channel multi-year wins at the Cannes Festival of Creativity, the One Show, D&AD, the Webby Awards, FastCo Innovation SXSW, and others. During her tenure at Y&R, Catherine established best practices, trained creative, tech and production units in strategic and integrated production, and delivered multi-million-dollar programs for clients in the consumer packaged goods, tech, not-for-profit and social cause spaces. She’s masterminded strategic partnerships with the New York International Children’s Film Festival, the 92 Street Y, and is working on an initiative designed to reboot historical exploration with partners including the Explorers Club and others. She’s recognized as an industry leader, a positive force for good, and was voted one of Adweek’s top branded-content creators.
Daniel PhelanEric PicardEric Picard is an advertising technology expert with more than 20 years of experience in the ad technology industry. Eric is currently Vice President of Advertising Product Management at Pandora Media. Previously Eric led product strategy for the DSP business at MediaMath, which acquired his startup Rare Crowds in 2014. Rare Crowds built micro-segmentation technology for finding valuable highly targeted audiences, at scale, and was a spin-out from TRAFFIQ, where Eric was the Chief Product Officer.
Previous to this, Eric was at Microsoft for six years, where he had a variety of roles in technology strategy. He helped set the company’s long-term vision for advertising technology, emerging media product planning, planning for incubation & research teams, and designed next generation advertising products. Eric managed advertising technology acquisition planning from 2005 through 2007 – including reviewing hundreds of deals, and participating on deal teams for numerous pivotal acquisitions, such as Massive, Screen Tonic, adECN, aQuantive and others.
Eric started working in ad technology as founder and director of product management at Bluestreak from 1997 to 2004, where he oversaw advertising products, such as third-party ad serving, ad analytics, rich media products and led development of many company technologies. A frequent speaker across the industry, Eric has written about advertising technology since 1999.
Joe PinskyJoe Pinsky is the head of product development of OTT solutions for Amazon Advertising. His team of product managers and software developers focuses on building products that enable our customers, advertisers, and publishers to grow their businesses. His team looks across products, content, creative formats, supply, and measurement to take a holistic view of digital video advertising. In 2019, Joe was instrumental in the launch of IMDb TV which unlocked unique ad-supported OTT reach. His team also enabled viewers worldwide to watch Thursday Night Football on Amazon Prime Video and Twitch. Additionally, products like genre blocking and video creative builder help build interactivity for OTT ads and give advertisers more control. In working closely with Amazon Publisher Services, Joe has built header bidder solutions for advertisers and helped to connect publishers to new advertising demand. We are excited to have Joe serve as a board member on the IAB’s Video Center of Excellence and be an active participant in critical conversations that are shaping customer experiences and the advertising industry at large. Prior to joining Amazon, Joe worked as a consultant at The Boston Consulting group in Chicago. Joe holds a Bachelor’s degree from Kansas State University and an MBA from Michigan University’s Ross School of Business. Joe lives in Seattle with his one daughter and two sons.
Gruia Pitigoi-AronGruia Pitigoi-Aron is the Vice President of Product for The Trade Desk. In this role, Gruia oversees the teams responsible for all product management, user experience, and enterprise solutions. These teams work closely with all internal business teams, engineering, clients, and partners as they strive to ship the right product at the right time with global impact and scale.
Prior to joining The Trade Desk, Gruia spent 10 years at Microsoft as a Product Manager in various capacities, working on Outlook.com/Hotmail, Windows Live Agents, and BizTalk Server. The general focus was always on core parts of the systems, with the largest amount of time spent scaling and managing Hotmail’s ever increasing storage infrastructure.
Gruia received his M.S. in Computer Science from the University of California, Los Angeles, and his bachelor’s degree in Computer Science for the University of California, Berkeley. He is based in The Trade Desk’s offices in San Jose, CA.
Krishna PoolaStephanie PragerStephanie is responsible for Twitter’s advertising business running through Agencies, Ads API, and Sales Partners, globally. Her team equips these partners with creative solutions to scale and deliver business outcomes for their portfolio of clients.
Prior to joining Twitter in 2013, Stephanie was a Managing Partner at MEC, where she led the Digital Practice. Earlier, as Vice President at MediaVest USA, she was responsible for overseeing research, development, and execution of digital media strategy for her clients.
Ms. Prager was named a 2020 “Female Frontier” honoree by Campaign US and was honored as one of Advertising Age’s “Women to Watch” in 2018.
She resides in New York City, holds a degree from Lehigh University, and is a proud wife and mother of two. She is @stephanieprager on Twitter.
Jay PrasadJay Prasad is Chief Strategy Officer for LiveRamp.
Mr. Prasad has led VideoAmp’s agency, broadcaster and data partnerships that were instrumental in developing new products such as ATV Ignite and it’s partnerships with Mediaocean, Comscore, and FreeWheel. Notably, Mr. Prasad is a co-inventor on VideoAmp’s patents.
Prior to joining VideoAmp, Mr. Prasad served as VP of Global Business Development at TubeMogul where he led the company’s launch of Programmatic TV, data and supply partnerships, as well as their international partnership teams in the U.S., EU, Japan, and Southeast Asia. Previously, he led strategic development at FreeWheel focused on broadcaster’s distribution to digital and OTT platforms. Jay has also held leadership roles w Yahoo!, and Ernst & Young.
Mr. Prasad holds a degree in Marketing, International Business, and Risk Management from the University of Wisconsin-Madison, and studied International Business and International Political Economics at the London Business School.
Ali RanaAs the Global Head of Snap Inc’s Measurement and Insight teams, Ali’s leads Snap Inc’s measurement strategy and the resulting execution across Snapchat’s advertiser clients. Ali’s group is responsible for providing solutions and strategic guidance to advertisers on how to measure and optimize the online and offline impact of Snapchat advertising. Prior to joining Snapchat, Ali spent 16 years at Kantar Millward Brown, more recently as the company’s Chief Digital Strategist. While at Millward Brown, Ali built a number of pioneering measurement solutions across leading platforms and advertisers.
Ali is based out of Snap Inc’s Santa Monica office in Los Angeles.
Chris RecordShenan ReedAdvertising Executive, digital media entrepreneur and public speaker, Shenan is a highly sought-after thought leader, regularly presenting at major advertising and digital media industry conferences. Her insights and opinions have been cited in The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, AdAge, MediaPost, Huffington Post, AdWeek and Women’s Wear Daily. Her deep understanding of advertising, media and analytics has mandated her inclusion on several advisory boards including Pinterest, AdLedger, Namely, Teads and Style Coalition.
Michael ReidyIn his current role, Mike oversees the digital sales for the NBCU Entertainment Vertical (NBC, USA & Syfy) with a focus on digital video and Strategic Partnerships: YouTube, Snapchat and Buzzfeed.
In his 11 year career with NBCU, Mike has held several leadership roles, most recently leading a converged team of both digital and television sellers. Mike gained acceptance into NBCU via the GE Experienced Commercial Leadership Program (ECLP); a 2-year program known for the development of Marketing and Sales Executives through Six Sigma training.
He received his BA from Southern Methodist University in Dallas, Texas, (focusing on Advertising and Theater), and his MBA from Thunderbird, the International School of Business (focusing on Marketing and Chinese).
Matthew Renne’Matthew Renne joins the Learning & Development team as an Account Director. Prior to joining the IAB, Matthew was with TBWA Worldwide where he led global partner relationships & regional precision marketing growth for Nissan. Matthew brings an energetic and detailed process driven approach to his work, which he looks forward to bringing to the L&D team. Outside the office, Matthew spends his time playing volleyball, baking, and biking.
Neal RichterWith 20 years of software experience, Neal is focused on optimizing business needs, leading tech teams to create relevant and effective data-driven products that build the bottom line and deliver client value. Prior to entering advertising technology, Neal worked at RightNow Technologies, an early CRM vendor that sold to Oracle in 2011. There Neal led a team of AI/ML engineers that pioneered the use of sentiment analysis, natural language processing and content search systems in over 36 languages within automated customer service systems. Neal currently serves as co-Chair of the OpenRTB protocol that standardized the process of RTB, the Deal-ID and the Native ads format and the new Ads.txt standard.
Joy RobinsJoy Robins is Chief Revenue Officer at The Washington Post. Robins joined The Post after five and a half years at Quartz, most recently serving as Global Chief Revenue Officer. There she led the company to triple digit growth while holding senior positions including SVP Global Revenue and Strategy and Vice President of Advertising and Strategy.
Before joining Quartz, Robins was a senior director at NBC News Digital and Vice President of digital advertising at BBC Worldwide. Her early career included positions at The Weather Channel and OMD.
Robins sits on the Board of Directors of the Ad Council, IAB and the DCN. In 2018, Robins was named one of the industry insiders solving digital advertising’s problems by Business Insider, and in 2017 she was recognized by Ad Age’s 40 under 40.
Robins graduated from Rutgers University.
Melissa RocaStudied Public Relations and Advertising at City College and bring several years of experience working in administrative roles.
Mike RomoffMike Romoff runs the Global Agency and Channel Sales team, helping the world’s biggest advertisers and their clients harness the power of LinkedIn’s platform. His breadth of experience spans a 19-year career where he has held key General Management, Operations, and Business Development positions at companies such as NBC, IDG, 360i and The Industry Standard Magazine (back in the day). Prior to his current role, Mike led the Global Sales and Advertising Operations teams at LinkedIn, responsible for the overall day-to-day operations of its advertising business. Mike holds a BA from Amherst College and an MBA from Columbia Business School as well as a 200 hour yoga instructor certification. He currently lives in Manhattan with his wife Heatherlynn and two children Niko and Bianka.
Scott RosenbergScott joined Roku in 2012 as Vice President of Advertising to develop and lead the company’s advertising business and was promoted in 2017 to GM and SVP of Advertising. In late 2017 he became GM of Platform Business overseeing both advertising and content and services. Before joining Roku, Scott co-founded and served as CEO of Umami Co, a companion TV mobile application company. Prior, Scott served as Vice President of Advanced Advertising at Rovi Corporation, where he led advertising sales. He also served as Director of Product Management at BlackArrow, Inc., a TV ad serving technology company. Earlier in his career, Scott held product and engineering roles focused on advertising and video technologies at Replay TV, Analog Devices and Intel Corporation. Scott holds a bachelor’s degree. in Computer Science from Princeton University and was a Fulbright Fellow to Japan. He also holds a master’s degree in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and an M.B.A. from the Sloan School at MIT.
Speaking experienceScott is a regular on the speaking circuit, participating in conferences including Advertising Week, IAB Digital Newfronts, SXSW, NATPE, Video Ad Summit, On Demand Summit and many more.
Randall RothenbergRandall Rothenberg is the Executive Chair of the Interactive Advertising Bureau, the trade association for digital media and marketing in the United States. Among the IAB’s 750 member companies are such major platforms as Google, Facebook, Microsoft, and Snap; the nation’s most important ad-supported media companies, including The New York Times, Walt Disney Co., NBC Universal, ViacomCBS, Hearst Magazines, Spotify, Verizon Media, Hulu, Warner Media, LinkedIn, and Meredith; incumbent and disruptor brands, including Coca-Cola, Walmart, Procter & Gamble, Hubble Contacts, ThirdLove, General Motors, Johnson & Johnson, and Citigroup; and scores of technology and data companies, among them Mediamath, LiveRamp, Quantcast, and Pubmatic.
Doug RozenAs CEO of dentsu Media across the Americas, Doug supports 3,000+ of the most forward-thinking media experts (across Carat, iProspect, dentsu X, 360i, Amplifi and more) who every day strive to deliver like never before. Known for exploiting the intersection of data, technology, and creativity to help modern marketers champion progress, Doug has been recognized for leading businesses through digital transformation and fortunate to be a part of numerous industry firsts.
Doug most recently served as the first Chief Media Officer at award-winning agency 360i, where he helped them become a Forrester leader, MediaPost Agency of the Year, and win over 20 new clients. He joined 360i from OMD, where he led all digital and innovation activities and drove client relationships with Apple, Hasbro, Eli Lilly, Disney, among others. Before OMD, Doug served as Chief Innovation Officer and SVP, General Manager at Meredith, where he led mobile and social activity, oversaw new products, and ran the entertainment client portfolio. Prior to Meredith, Doug was SVP at Carlson Marketing, where he developed and managed the global loyalty provider’s agency services unit including, creative, media, mobile, social, and strategy offerings. While there, he also helped in its acquisition by Aimia. Doug also served as Senior Partner and Managing Director at JWT, where he established[email protected]and combined it with JWT’s direct and data offerings to form[email protected]This ultimately led to one of the top non-traditional agencies at its time. Doug’s prior experience includes many firsts: building the first intranet for a major auto OEM, designing the first online acquisition campaign for a national ISP, and streaming one of the first collegiate football games.
Doug is a cancer survivor and proud advocate for Stand Up to Cancer. He is an avid cyclist and currently lives in CT with his wife and two teenage children.
Tim RuderTim has more than 20 years experience working with digital news organizations to grow audiences, institutionalize editorial best practices, create new products and get the most from tools and technologies to drive great results.
He understands traffic opportunities from all sources (search, social, paid marketing, PR, etc.) and how a publisher can capture and keep new audiences while being true to their voice, brand and strategy. He is most effective when working across publisher departments — editorial, tech, marketing and sales — helping the individuals and teams maximize their contribution to common goals.
Tim’s results include: capturing the highest share of a target audience of any news web site, substantially increasing site engagement, improving visibility in search, increasing reach in social networks and more. Typical engagements will see improvements of 20 to 100% in the first year.
Ruder developed product lines for publishers that exceeded $40 million in second year revenues (and have continued growing), improved workflows to lower costs and developed new business strategies for publishers in need of a pivot. In addition to delivering business results, Tim’s work has received many industry accolades, including multiple Eppy’s, Webby’s, a Wammie and one of the first 1to1 Innovator Awards (for his work on personalization in news).
Tim is also an accomplished public speaker and has appeared at the World Association of Newspapers (WAN/IFRA) World Congress, multiple appearances at SxSW and numerous appearance at a variety of search, marketing and product development conferences.
Rosemarie RyanRosemarie is a renowned leader, brand builder and rabble-rouser in the marketing industry.
She began her career in account planning and was among the first wave of Brits to import the Account Planning discipline to the United States at Chiat Day. As president of K&B, she took it from a 30-person boutique to a 400-person strong award-winning agency. She then took on the mantle of leading the 125 year-old JWT into the 21st century. In her tenure she restructured the workplace, the teams and creative product, and doubled the profits of the agency. Not satisfied with reinventing an agency, she decided it was time to reinvent the industry.
In September of 2010, Rosemarie, along with her creative partner Ty Montague, left JWT and founded co:collective. Co: is a Storydoing collective focused on business and brand transformation and is fortunate enough to be working with likes of YouTube, Infiniti , Google and Timberland.
In September 2012, Rosemarie was named as one of the ‘100 most influential Women in Advertising’, by Advertising Age.
Paul RyanPaul Ryan is the chief technology officer at OpenX where he oversees the company’s technology and product development. He leads a global team of more than 150 engineers, data scientists and product managers tasked with fostering the development of new, innovative programmatic technology. Prior to OpenX, Paul held CTO roles at Yellow Pages Group, Leads360, and Overture. During his time at Overture, Paul was principally responsible for engineering the world’s first high-scale auction-based market for the web, an innovation that established the foundation of today’s $45 billion programmatic marketplace.
Paul holds a BSE, EECS from Princeton University, an MS in Computer Science from John Hopkins University and an MBA from the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania.
John SabellaExperienced Chief Technology Officer with a demonstrated history of working in the internet industry. Strong information technology professional skilled in Cloud Transformation, Digital Strategy, Mobile Applications, Software as a Service (SaaS), and Start-ups.
Positive, proven, and successful, technology executive has the strategic vision for developing assets and adding the greatest value. Driven by big challenges, to build the next “big thing”, to hire the teams, to build the processes, to get everyone producing at their best potential and to collaborate with clients. Committed to the company’s business objectives and selfless in ethos, I believe that facts should drive direction, and that performance needs to be measured with clear goals and objectives.
David Sable“Never forget that only dead fish swim with the current.”These words of British author-journalist Malcolm Muggeridge, spoken many years ago, are a mantra for David Sable, whose advertising career spans more than 30 years. His profound commitment to innovative customer-centric advertising continues to power his journey.
David was appointed Global CEO of Y&R in February 2011, but his ties to the agency date back to his first job in the industry, when he joined Y&R’s training program in 1976. He later went on to Wells Rich Greene, then co-founded the award-winning Israeli agency, Mimsar-Arielly. On his return to the U.S., David spent time at PR giant Burson-Marsteller and Cohn & Wolfe (both parts of the Y&R group), where he was counselor to clients like Colgate-Palmolive, Digital Equipment Corporation and Coca-Cola.
David rejoined Y&R in 1990 to lead the United States Postal Service account, where his service approach helped direct a new messaging platform and other assets, including its logo, which are still in use today. Under David’s leadership of the USPS team, Y&R created the industry’s very first website for a client.
An early digital entrepreneur, David co-founded Genesis Direct, an innovative, web-based firm instrumental in establishing a direct-to-fan Internet presence for the National Hockey league, Major League Baseball, National Football league and the National Basketball and the National Basketball Association.
For the 10 years prior to Y&R, David was vice chairman and COO at sibling company, Wunderman, where he was responsible for managing their global marketing services network â€” and presided over its digital transformation and the creation of their digital offering. As a leading authority on digital marketing, David serves as an adviser to many digital start-ups in the world.
Not surprisingly, David has an active presence in the blogosphere, with The Weekly Ramble, which he has been writing since 2006 and which has garnered a large audience. Fast Company recently invited David to become an expert blogger on corporate culture; his first blog for them, “Finding the ‘Colere’ in Corporate Culture,” debuted recently. Y&R’s global client, Xerox, asked him to share his thoughts on productivity on their blog, #FocusFriday: Reframing Productivity.
David is a Director at Large of the American Association of Advertising Agencies (the 4As) and was a founding member of its Digital Advisory Board. He has served on juries at the Cannes International Creative Festival, including the highly prestigious Titanium panel. He is a frequent speaker on the digital environment, for example, to Microsoft UK, where he spoke on how digital is driving every communication today. David is frequently tapped for his marketing and digital expertise throughout the industry and around the world. Recent interviews include Campaign Asia, Forbes on driving innovation, Forbes on how everything is digital, as well as Digiday and Microsoft Advertising.
Active in philanthropy and education all his life, David was named to the New Yorkers Volunteer State Office of National and Community Service Commission in 2010. Two years earlier, the Mayor of the City of New York, Michael R. Bloomberg, appointed him to serve as a member of the Cultural Advisory Committee of the New York City Department of Cultural Affairs.
David and his wife, Debbie, have two married daughters and Henry and Teddy, their treasured grandsons.
Gyanda SachdevaLena SafronLena Safron is an experienced graphic designer who has created for an eclectic collection of individuals, companies, and organizations. She has designed marketing materials for women’s fashion brands Vince Camuto and Jones New York while at Authentic Brands Group. Other work experience includes designing for entertainment marketing company Passion Point Collective and event planning company Drury Design Dynamics. She has also worked on the accounts of select entertainment and pharma clients. Lena received her BFA in Communications Design at Pratt Institute and her senior thesis work was featured at the Pratt Show for industry professionals. Offline, Lena enjoys going to concerts and Broadway shows, and in the past year has developed a love for hiking and the great outdoors. She stays on-trend creatively by following other artists on social media and visiting galleries and museums whenever possible. Lena is very excited to join IAB as the first in-house graphic designer!Jenny SchauerJenny Schauer currently holds a Media VP/Group Director role at Digitas where she’s found a home for the last eight years. During the majority of her tenure there she’s been guiding the strategic direction for a large financial services account in the Video Investment Lead role which oversees their total video strategy across linear and digital platforms. Additionally Jenny now leads the planning oversight for Hilton hotels, with a focus on advanced video strategies.
In addition to her day-to-day role, Jenny is also the national Video Center of Excellence lead at Digitas, heading up a cross-office COE team that’s shaping the video approach for Digitas overall. Through this role, she also acts the agency’s voice on digital video in the trades – frequently quoted in leading publications like AdAge, Digiday, Reuters, and eMarketer.
Jenny was also named the 2015 CIMA Rising Star, as well as one of a select few national 2015 Rising Stars from Cynopsis Media.
Susan SchiekoferSusan Schiekofer is the Chief Digital Investment Officer for GroupM North America. She is responsible for digital trading and implementation across all of GroupM’s agencies including Mindshare, MEC, MediaCom, Maxus, and Essence.
Susan’s digital skill set, coupled with her broader knowledge of trading best practices across all media formats, ensures that GroupM continues to lead the market with the best, most valuable and accountable digital solutions for clients of GroupM agencies.
She is figurative in GroupM’s efforts to improve the integrity of the digital marketplace in the U.S. by championing viewability, anti-fraud safeguards, measurement, and standards.
Schiekofer has been a leader in the digital media space at WPP and GroupM since 1994. She founded the digital media offering at Ogilvy & Mather, which was later rebranded to[email protected], and worked on accounts including IBM, TD Ameritrade and Lenovo, among many others. In 2010, Schiekofer joined MEC to head up the AT&T digital business, and soon became responsible for all of digital at MEC. In July of 2014, she moved to GroupM to lead digital investment for Maxus and MediaCom, and to assume responsibility for all of online video.
Wilfried SchobeiriWil Schobeiri is the Chief Technology Officer at MediaMath, the leading independent technology platform for Marketers. Based in Chicago, he oversees the technology strategy and architecture that power the operations of thousands of marketers globally. While his focus is primarily the development and operations of large-scale distributed systems, he’s also obsessed with building great teams and creating strong engineering cultures. A lifetime technologist and entrepreneur, Wil launched his first tech company at the age of 13 out of his parent’s basement. Prior to joining MediaMath, he led development at a number of startups, including Tap.Me, a gaming ad platform that was acquired by MediaMath in December 2012. Since then, he’s played a central role in MediaMath’s transformation into a platform-first technology organization. Wil is a proud college dropout.
Michael SchoenMichael Schoen is the VP, Marketing Solutions at Neustar, developing and perfecting an integrated platform that enables companies to win in the connected age. Michael oversees the end-to-end system of identity that gives marketers a complete, real-time portrait of their customers and prospects based on accurate data, enabling a personalized dialogue across all marketing channels. His leadership has been instrumental in architecting the industry’s most authoritative and real-time marketing platform, built on trusted identity across people, places, and things.
Prior to joining Neustar in 2014, Michael was the EVP, Product at Cadreon, IPG’s cross-channel audience measurement, management and buying platform. Michael was responsible for driving the product strategy, development, and technology partnerships that enabled Cadreon’s offerings across all addressable media. Prior to joining Cadreon, Michael was General Manager, Advertising Platforms and VP, Product & Technology at LookSmart, where he was responsible for building out paid search platform and publisher syndication business.
Michael holds an AB in Computer Science from Harvard College and an MBA from UCLA.
Michael ScottKatie ShellKatie joined IAB Tech Lab in May 2021. She works as a Data Coordinator. Katie is an alumna of Bucknell University in the Freeman College of Management where she earned a Bachelor’s degree in Markets, Innovation, and Design in 2020.
Sheila ShultzSteve SilversSomer SimpsonKate SloanKate Sloan is a Programmatic Sales Director at Hearst Magazines Digital Media (HMDM).
In this role, she helps advertisers connect with readers of Hearst Magazines’ portfolio of iconic brands – including ELLE, Esquire, Good Housekeeping – by utilizing evolving technologies to increase transactional efficiency and ROI. She helps lead a team of five programmatic sellers representing Hearst’s global magazine brands as well as Complex Media.
Prior to joining HMDM, Kate worked for Core Audience, a corporate-level group that unified data and ad tech partnerships across Hearst’s TV, Newspaper, and Magazine divisions.
Earlier in her career, Kate worked at Rocket Fuel (DSP) around the time of their IPO and helped to grow the company’s largest telecom and CPG accounts.
Alexus SmithAndrew SnyderKelsey SorensonDavid SpectorDave Spector is the Co-Founder of ThirdLove, the 3rd largest online bra and underwear company in America. Dave has always been an entrepreneur, starting his first company in college and another during business school. Prior to founding ThirdLove, he focused on consumer internet, e-commerce, and analytics investing as a Partner at Sequoia Capital. One investment, in Stella & Dot, got him particularly interested in female-focused e-commerce. Before Sequoia, Dave was at IBM and Google, where he helped lead Google’s first efforts in commerce with the launch of Google Checkout, Product Search, and Google Analytics. Outside of ThirdLove, he’s an angel investor in two dozen companies and an advisor to others.
Dave has been recognized as: National Retail Federation Disruptors, Goldman Sachs’ 100 Most Intriguing Entrepreneurs and EY Entrepreneur of the Year in Northern California. He is also a certified pilot and enthusiastically very unaccomplished as a triathlete.
Scott SpencerScott Spencer is the Director of Product Management, Sustainable Ads at Google. Scott sets the vision and strategy for Google’s work to create a long-term viable ads ecosystem for publishers, users, and advertisers. Scott and his team develop products that help Google to combat ad fraud, ad spam and malware, and maintain the integrity of broader display network. His team oversees Google’s advertising and publisher policies that help to protect people from harmful, misleading, offensive and annoying ads. As part of those efforts, Scott works with the Coalition for Better Ads, an industry group tasked to improve online ad experiences that drive people to install ad blockers and establish an industry-wide standard for ad experiences. In addition, Scott represents Google in industry forums like TAG and the IAB Tech Lab, help to develop and advocate for standards across the industry.
Throughout his time at Google, Scott has worked on nearly every product and platform in Google’s ads portfolio. He played an instrumental role in the development and launch of the DoubleClick Ad Exchange over 10 years ago as well as Google’s acquisition of Invite Media which eventually would become DoubleClick Bid Manager, Google’s demand side platform (DSP).
Before joining Google, Scott was a management consultant at Integral, Inc. providing strategy analysis to fortune 500 companies on Product Development Process and Customer Satisfaction leverage. Scott holds a BS in Economics from MIT.
David StaasDavid Staas is President of NinthDecimal, responsible for the company’s go-to-market strategy and overseeing marketing, product management, engineering, and research. A 20-year veteran of the mobile ecosystem, David has created break-through businesses and solutions in the advertising, marketing, and mobile infrastructure markets. At NinthDecimal, David has led the creation of Location Graph, the industry’s first mobile audience platform based on location behavior, as well as the company’s evolution into mobile and enterprise data services for the world’s leading brands.
Prior to NinthDecimal, David built one of the first mobile ad networks and mobile ad platforms at Ad Infuse (acquired by Velti). Prior to Ad Infuse, David led global product marketing at Openwave Systems, the company that created today’s mobile Internet. He also co-founded the Messaging Anti-Abuse Working Group, an industry consortium of mobile carriers, telcos, and media companies to combat spam. He joined Openwave through the acquisition of Software.com, where he led product management and market development for the company’s flagship communications product. David has also launched new services and new products at companies such as Deloitte Consulting and Coca-Cola, and is a frequent author and speaker at key industry events.
Nada StirrattNada C. Stirratt is the Vice President, North America, Global Business Group for Meta. Prior to Meta, Nada served as the Chief Executive Officer of Verve Wireless, Inc., a provider of SaS-location-based mobile advertising solutions for retail, auto, CPG, restaurants, and other drive-to-retail brand advertisers.
Nada also previously served as Chief Revenue Officer and Executive Vice President for Acxiom, the data-mining and analytics company. In this role, Nada led all of the client-facing areas of the business, including field, account management, and consulting across the globe.
Stirratt came to Acxiom with a proven track record of delivering transformational business results. Prior to Acxiom, she served as Chief Revenue Officer at MySpace, where she led global sales, strategy and advertising operations. Previously, Nada served as Executive Vice President of digital advertising at MTV Networks, where she successfully led the company’s aggressive expansion into the digital advertising arena across all properties, overseeing advertising sales, strategy and operations.
Earlier in her career, Nada was senior vice president and general manager of advertising sales at Advertising.com and also held senior positions with some of the world’s most well-known brands, including AOL, Moviefone, Hearst Publications and Condé Nast. Stirratt holds a bachelor’s degree in advertising from the University of Illinois. She is based in New York City.
Dan TaylorDan Taylor leads display advertising platform strategy for Google’s global business organization, focused on product innovation, commercialization and advertiser engagement at scale across Google Ads and Google Marketing Platform in all countries where Google operates.
Primary focus is on building and growing advertiser solutions and innovations in data strategy, inventory quality, ad formats, automated buying and measurement to power every ad experience and make the web and apps work for advertisers, publishers and consumers across devices.
Prior to his current role, Dan led high performing sales and activation teams in Search, Display, Video and Mobile as well as a long career in broadcast media sales. Dan is based in New York.
Ajit ThupilChristina Ting CuaChristina leads Product Marketing for all of Instagram’s Ad Solutions. This includes Instagram’s Brand and Direct Response solutions in both Feed and Stories. She was part of the early team that helped Instagram scale its monetization products and is passionate about helping marketers find success on Instagram. Prior to Instagram, Christina worked at Bain and Company in their LA and SF offices and Google’s NY office. Christina is a NorCal native, received a BS in Business Administration from UC Berkeley, and an MBA from Harvard Business School.
John TooheyJohn was the Group Vice President of Finance for Time Warner Cable Media in New York, serving as the finance lead for TWC’s $1 billion advertising arm.
Prior to this role, John spent a year establishing TWC’s change management function as Group Vice President of Operational Effectiveness. John coordinated process improvement activities across the company. John previously spent six years as a leader in TWC’s Corporate Finance group, including three years heading up TWC’s investor relations support and competitive analysis activities as Vice President of Financial Analysis and Special projects, as well as three years in charge of TWC’s Corporate Financial Planning and Analysis team.
John’s broad media finance background includes four years at Cablevision, seven years at CBS and five years at NBC, all with progressive management responsibilities. John also spent three years as a mid-career management consultant at Booz Allen Hamilton, advising a variety of clients both inside and outside the media industry.
John holds a bachelor’s degree in Government from Harvard University, and an MBA from Columbia Business School. He and his wife Kristin have three children and live in Westport, CT.
Zak TreuhaftJohn TrimbleJohn Trimble serves as the Chief Advertising Revenue Officer of SiriusXM, where he is responsible for all advertising revenue, strategic sales marketing, and advertising operations for SiriusXM, Pandora, Stitcher and Adswizz. Throughout his 11 years at SXM, he was part of the management team that built Pandora from a Start Up into the public markets and most recently combined the assets of SiriusXM into the advertising brand, SXM Media. SXM Media’s diverse revenue streams tap satellite, podcasting and streaming audio that reach consumers in their cars as well as on their computers, mobile phones, and consumer electronic devices. Prior to SiriusXM, John held several senior level roles overseeing Sales at Glam Media, Fox Interactive Media, and Phase 2 Media.
John received his BA from St. Lawrence University. He currently sits on the Interactive Advertising Board and the Mobile Media Association Board. He is also on the Board of the Danny Butler Memorial Fund and St. Vincent’s Hospital in Harrison, NY. He resides in Rye, New York with his wife, Maggie, and their four children, Molly, Jack, Colin, and Libby.
Joey TrotzJoey Trotz is a recognized industry leader and expert in digital advertising. For 20+ years, he has identified, built and implemented critical technologies supporting hundreds of millions of dollars in marketing budgets.
He is currently the Global Head of Technology for Watson Advertising where he leads engineering efforts for cognitive marketing and advertising tech. Mr. Trotz works on the policies, strategies, and roadmaps where technology and monetization intersect, focused on applying emerging technology including IBM Watson and IBM Blockchain in support of strategic goals.
Previously, Mr. Trotz held a variety of executive roles during his 18-year tenure at Turner Broadcasting.
Steve TruxalAs VP of Product Management, Steve oversees the publisher, marketplaces, and platform product groups at Xandr. He and his team set the strategy and roadmap, develop innovative products, and drive commercialization for key product offerings, including the adserver, SSP, media products, supply & demand quality, and DSP integrations. Steve joined AppNexus 2011, prior to the company’s acquisition by AT&T and subsequent evolution into Xandr. Throughout his tenure, Steve has been responsible for a multitude of different product areas, including the fraud prevention, the establishment of Prebid, identity, and consumer privacy & regulation. He’s led industry groups including TAG Anti-Malware and the IAB’s establishment of Transparency and Consent Framework for The GDPR.
Prior to AppNexus, Steve was a management consultant with McKinsey & Company at their NYC office. He specialized in high tech & media industries and advised the leadership of Fortune 100 companies on their strategy and operations. Steve holds a Ph.D. in mechanical engineering, a Masters in electrical engineering, and a Masters in mechanical engineering from The University of Michigan, where he focused on micro-electronic systems.
Dorothy TseDorothy Tse is the Vice President of Product at Quantcast. In her current role, Dorothy is responsible for scaling Quantcast’s Advertising product suite while developing new capabilities that drive value for customers. Dorothy most recently served as Head of Global Marketing Solutions Technology at Facebook where she led Product Management for global internal data products and internal CRM. Prior to Facebook, Tse spent time at Nielsen as SVP of Product Leadership responsible for their digital advertising measurement products and self service capabilities. She was previously Vice President of Product Management at advertising effectiveness company, Vizu which was acquired by Nielsen and led their acquisition activities. Dorothy holds a B.S. in International Business from the University of California, Davis.
Dana TunksAs Broadsign’s Chief Financial Officer, Dana Tunks oversees all financial reporting, treasury, corporate development, corporate finance and taxation and risk-management activities globally.
A seasoned professional, Dana has held roles as Chief Financial Officer and Advisory Board Member of software and technology companies in the healthcare, mobile commerce and emissions industries. She also spent over 23 years as a Senior Partner with Ernst & Young LLP, both in Audits and Consulting.
Dana is a Chartered Accountant and received her Honours Bachelor of Business Administration from Wilfrid Laurier University. Her community involvement has included the Audit Committee of Wilfrid Laurier University, Innovation Council at the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants and acting as President, Vice President and Audit Committee Chair of the Kitchener-Waterloo YWCA.
Lisa UtzschneiderLisa Utzschneider is the chief executive officer of Integral Ad Science and a member of the company’s board of directors. IAS is a global technology company that offers data and solutions to establish a safer, more effective advertising ecosystem. Lisa joined IAS as CEO in January 2019, bringing more than 20 years of digital advertising expertise and tech-industry leadership experience to the role.
Prior to joining IAS, Lisa held the position of chief revenue officer at Yahoo where she oversaw Yahoo’s global sales organization and provided solutions for the needs of advertisers worldwide. Lisa served as CRO up through the acquisition of Yahoo by Verizon in June 2017.
Previously, Lisa was Amazon’s Vice President of Global Advertising Sales, where she developed the company’s global advertising business through product, marketing, sales, and operations strategies, driving consistent revenue growth. Prior to Amazon, Lisa spent 10 years at Microsoft culminating in her role as General Manager of the national sales and service teams where she focused on driving revenue for the company’s top online advertising accounts. She also developed the U.S. advertising go-to-market strategy.
Lisa has previously served as a board member for the Ad Council and the Interactive Advertising Bureau, where she was also a member of the organization’s executive committee. Notable honors include: the Adweek 50, Business Insider’s “Most Powerful Women in Mobile Advertising”, New York Business Journal’s “Women of Influence” and Working Mother’s “50 Most Powerful Moms”. Lisa holds a bachelor’s degree from Bates College and a master’s degree in public administration from New York University. She resides in Greenwich, CT with her husband and two daughters.
Lisa ValentinoLisa recently joined Disney as EVP, Client & Brand Solutions reporting to President, Rita Ferro. Lisa and her division is challenged with architecting next generation partnerships rooted in insights, integrated content marketing, and digital for the multi-billion dollar company. Previously, Lisa was Executive Vice President of Revenue Innovation for Univision Communications Inc. (UCI), the leading media company serving Hispanic America. Valentino led UCI’s digital, integrated marketing and revenue teams to develop strategy and activation for customer solutions. Prior to joining UCI, Valentino worked at Condé Nast where she served as Chief Revenue Officer, overseeing growth as well as strategic planning to accelerate new revenue growth and transform Condé Nast from a publisher to a client led media partner and brand storyteller. Prior to Condé Nast, Valentino worked at ESPN where she oversaw a division responsible for over $1 billion in revenue focused on multimedia partnerships across the Company’s portfolio, including domestic and international TV, digital, events, and print. She also managed all digital and mobile ad sales revenue for the company in her first 3 years with the company. Valentino graduated from Lafayette College with dual degrees in English and Art History and played D1 soccer. She currently resides in Westchester and is wife to Ami and mother to Liam (9) and Olivia (7).
Rik van der KooiRik van der Kooi is the Corporate Vice President of Microsoft Advertising. In this capacity, he leads the company’s global advertising business and its sales, marketing, support and partnership organization, which is focused on delivering advertising and monetization solutions for marketers. Rik also plays a key leadership role in an evolved strategy across Microsoft’s search, advertising, news and browser businesses, holding accountability for growth and development as well as expansion of offerings for enterprise and consumer customers.
Under Rik’s leadership, the Microsoft Advertising business has grown to over $9B in revenue and the team has successfully formed numerous industry partnerships with Verizon, Yahoo!, AppNexus, AOL and others. He is a prior Chairman and current board member of the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB). He is an executive sponsor of the Blacks at Microsoft (BAM) employee resource group and considers himself an ally to all marginalized populations.
Prior to his current role as CVP, Rik served as the Chief Operating Officer and Chief Financial Officer of the Online Services Division at Microsoft. Before that, he held the roles of Chief Financial Officer of Windows; General Manager of Finance and Administration for the Sales, Marketing and Services Group in EMEA, based in Paris; and Finance Director for the Benelux countries. Prior to joining Microsoft in 1999, Rik was Chief Financial Officer for IBC Vehicles, Ltd., a subsidiary of General Motors Corp. in the United Kingdom.
Rik earned his Master of Business Administration from Instituto de Estudios Superiores de la Empresa (IESE) in Barcelona and his Bachelor of Business Administration from Nyenrode Business University in the Netherlands.
Rik is married with three kids and enjoys playing music and soccer in his spare time.
Julie Van UllenJulie Van Ullen is the Managing Director for US and Canada for Rakuten Marketing. In her role, Julie is responsible for overseeing the commercial organization selling and supporting the holistic suite of Rakuten Marketing’s affiliate and performance marketing solutions for Brands, Agencies, and Publishers. Additionally, Julie drives the strategy and vision related to all aspects of go-to-market for Rakuten’s Affiliate+ (data, prospecting, retargeting, social, search) offerings. Prior to joining Rakuten Marketing, Julie was the Vice President of Digital, for FreeWheel. In her role, she served as digital segment GM to oversee product vision, client acquisition, and overall go-to-market strategy for FreeWheel’s suite of video ad serving and monetization solutions. Before FreeWheel, Julie served as Vice President of Publisher Solutions at premium ad exchange, OpenX, overseeing the Sales function for the East Coast and before that as Vice President of Member Services at the IAB where she was responsible for attracting new members and developing a portfolio of opportunities and initiatives to keep current members engaged. As a part of serving IAB’s membership, Julie oversaw IAB’s elite Committees and Councils, charged with putting industry best practices and thought leadership into the marketplace. Those focal areas included Native, Programmatic, Digital Video, AdvancedTV, Digital Audio, Social Media, and Gaming.
Prior to making her transition to the digital space, Julie was an Editor at The Taunton Press in the books division of Fine Woodworking and Fine Homebuilding and still enjoys furniture-making in her free time. When not on the job, ex-opera singer Julie sings with the classic rock cover band.
Donia VanceDonia Vance, joins the IAB as Senior Content Director. She brings a wide breadth of experience to her role including go-to-market strategy, content development, experiential programming and brand marketing. Donia was previously the Senior Partnerships Director at Unger Media’s Greenwich Wine + Food Festival where she managed and oversaw national accounts including PepsiCo, Jeep and Anheuser-Busch. Prior to that, she was the Executive Director Customer Engagement and Events at WebMD where she created strategy for marketing and thought leadership activations that drove brand awareness and revenue for both the Pharma and CPG sides of the business. She has also worked at Hearst, Conde Nast, Martha Stewart and Rolling Stone, where she first developed her passion for media and experiential marketing.
Megan VasilesMegan Vasiles is a digital marketing strategist with over a decade of experience helping global organizations optimize marketing plans and build long-term strategies for success.
She lives in Manhattan and hopes to adopt a cat soon! In her downtime you can find her writing science fiction, baking tasty vegan treats, or wandering the aisles of the nearest bookstore.
Anudit VikramAnudit Vikram is a business and technology leader with over 20 years of experience, 15+ of which have been in the advertising and marketing technologies space. His deep experience in data centric product innovation and design and innate understanding of the ad-tech space make him a frequent contributor to industry publications, conferences, and round-tables.
As the SVP of Products for MediaMath, Anudit is responsible for the strategy and roadmap of the entire suite of MediaMath’s product capabilities. He drives the evolution, positioning, and launch of new features and programs across all regions and brings MediaMath’s product vision to life.
Prior to MediaMath, Anudit worked at Dun & Bradstreet, Merkle, Yahoo!, Microsoft, and other noteworthy organizations leading teams and – in his words – “building cool stuff … changing the world one release at a time!” A past board member of the IAB Data Center of Excellence and co-chair of the B2B Committee, Anudit is also active in helping shape the industry as it shape-shifts through its maturation.
Anudit holds a Masters in Technology Management from Columbia University and a Bachelors in Engineering from the University of Pune (India). He lives in NYC with his wife and is an avid photographer and optimistic golfer in his spare time.
Deborah WahlDeborah Wahl was appointed General Motors Global Chief Marketing Officer (CMO) on Sept. 1, 2019. She previously served as the Global CMO of Cadillac, where she guided the directional shift of the brands’ look and feel – with bright visuals and heavy hitting anthems. She also took the brand to new places like ComplexCon, the PGA, and launched aggressive campaigns to bring customers to showrooms, like XT4 – 4TX. Rooted firmly in the school of performance marketing, she always drives her teams to use data to change how they seek and engage with consumers. Prior to joining General Motors, Deborah served as the Senior Vice President and CMO for McDonald’s from 2014 to 2017, where she played a key role in the brand’s turnaround. In addition to McDonald’s, Deborah has held a number of CMO and Vice President positions, including at PulteGroup , Chrysler and Lexus. Deborah earned a bachelor’s degree in Economics from Wellesley College and an MBA from The Wharton School. She also has a master’s degree from The Lauder Institute, University of Pennsylvania. Forbes named her to its Most Influential CMO list in 2018 and 2019, and she was recognized as one of 2019 AdWeek 50 Marketing and Tech Execs. Deborah is an active business leader who serves on the boards of Groupon, Mediaocean and The Mobile Marketing Association (MMA), as well as on the Board of Trustees of Cranbrook Educational Community.
Steve WaxSteve Wax attended Reed College and the UCLA Film School; he received one of the first American Institute short film grants, was a member of the landmark San Francisco film collective, Cine Manifest.
Steve was also a founding board member of the Independent Feature Project. In the first phase of his career, he produced a number of independent feature films.
Steve founded Chelsea Pictures in 1987; Chelsea pioneered the use of feature and documentary directors in commercial production.
Under Chelsea’s banner Wax produced the feature film Unmade Beds. He also exec-produced the Oscar Nominated short film, Killing Joe, and the Emmy-nominated documentary Following Sean.
In 2000 Steve began working with two of the Blair Witch filmmakers, forming Campfire, the narrative ad agency. Campfire’s social marketing projects include brand clients such as GM, Verizon, Dr Pepper/Snapple, Harley-Davidson, and many entertainment brands, including True Blood, Game of Thrones, and Shark Week. Campfire is now a division of Sapient Nitro and the Publicis Groupe.
Steve is now a partner at The Cooke Wax Partnership, a two year old agency that combines brand strategy with social marketing. Among Cooke Wax’s clients are IMAX, United Way of NYC, Libertine drinks and TmaxSoft.
He’s also a member of the Agency Advisory Board of the Interactive Agency Bureau, and a longstanding board member of Issue Project Room, the landmark experimental theater in Brooklyn.
Ken WeinerKen Weiner leads the engineering, product, and supply teams behind the industry’s top computer vision platform for marketers and rights holders. As an active member of the ad tech community, Weiner is a guest columnist for VentureBeat and Forbes, a frequent speaker at conferences and a participant of industry groups such as IAB’s OpenRTB Working Group. He also runs the LA AdTech Meetup which brings together ad tech engineers and product managers. Weiner was LA Business Journal’s 2015 CTO of the Year, and in 2003, he was included in the InfoWorld 100 for his work on uPortal, an open-source web portal framework for the higher education community.
Before coming to GumGum, Weiner was the Director of Engineering at the lead-generation platform LowerMyBills.com, acquired by Experian in 2005. He has also worked as an open-source software consultant, a project manager and an instructor at Interactive Business Solutions, acquired by Unicon Inc. in 2003. Weiner received a B.S. from UCLA and currently lives in Los Angeles. Away from the office, he enjoys mountain biking, hiking, California native plants, jazz music and playing the saxophone.
Jason WhiteJason White is the Senior Vice President & GM of Global Programmatic Revenue & Partnerships for CBS Interactive as well as serving as the Co-Chairman of the Programmatic Council at the IAB and board member of IAB Tech Lab. Jason has extensive experience in online digital media and marketing, specifically centered on development and implementation of best-of-breed digital strategies for both digital publishers and advertisers. He has proven success in analyzing consumer behavior trends and implementing brand, direct response and digital monetization programs with a strong background in strategy, management, sales, marketing and product development. Triple-digit revenue growth through customer acquisition and monetization initiatives can be attributed to White’s work with various Fortune 100 companies and start-ups.
Before CBSi, White was an SVP and GM at OpenX and EVP of Marketing at TrueCar. Prior to OpenX, White was SVP and GM at the FOX Audience Network building the MyAds ad platform, in addition to the third party network and the first RTB exchange, which was among the Top 5 ad networks per ComScore. White has also held roles at Bank of America and LowerMyBills.
Jason serves on the advisory boards of Convertro, TrueCar, and OpenX and graduated from the University of Georgia.
Grant WhitmoreGrant Whitmore is SVP, Chief Digital Operations Officer at Tribune Publishing where he is responsible for Tribune’s digital operation strategy and execution. Grant’s focus includes improving monetization and revenue delivery across all Tribune properties, generating corporate-wide advertising growth, strengthening local and national sales efforts, and improving overall digital operations. Prior to his tenure at Tribune, Grant held a variety of digital leadership positions at companies ranging from startups to global media properties.
Bryan WienerBryan Wiener is CEO of digital agency 360i. Under his leadership, 360i has earned a spot on Ad Age’s coveted “Agency A-List” and Fast Company’s “World’s Most Innovative Companies” roster, helping clients like Coca-Cola, Kraft Foods, Diageo and NBC Universal engage their target audiences across the ever-changing digital landscape. Mediaweek has named Bryan a Top 50 person in media two years running for his visionary leadership within the industry and recently named him a Media All-Star.
Bryan’s background includes a series of senior management positions at Net2Phone Global Services, a pioneer in VoIP communications technology. Prior to that, he served as General Manager at TheGlobe.com and Director of Business Development at Standard and Poor’s. Bryan is Vice Chairman of the AAAA Digital Board and serves on the AAAA National Board of Directors and the IAB Agency Advisor Board. He is also an advisor to NYU’s Media & Entertainment Student & Alumni Associations.
Bryan holds an MBA from the Stern School of Business at NYU and a BA in History from Syracuse University.
Follow Bryan on Twitter at @bwiener.
Rob WilkRob Wilk leads the advertising team at Microsoft and is responsible for building and scaling Microsoft’s search/native advertising offerings with nearly $10 billion in revenue annually. Rob manages the sales, marketing, operations, retail media and partnerships teams with more than 2,000 employees across the globe.
Rob has 25 years of advertising and media experience with the majority specifically focused on digital media and paid search on both the agency and publisher sides. Before joining Microsoft, Rob was the founding Vice President of Sales at Foursquare, responsible for building the sales team and leading sales initiatives across the Foursquare brand and agency partners. Prior to Foursquare, Rob worked at Yahoo leading a team of US- and Canada-based employees tasked with driving optimal paid search performance for Yahoo’s biggest advertisers with yearly revenue of $1 billion. He oversaw the field search account management team, the global search account management team and the award-winning search optimization and strategy team.
Rob is a nationally recognized media expert and has spoken at Cannes, Advertising Week, Search Engine Strategies Conference, Search Marketing Expo Conference, Search Insider Summits and many more. He also actively serves on the board of SCOPE, anorganization that provides summer camp scholarships to children from underserved communities.
John WinsorJohn Winsor is a leading strategic marketing and product innovation thinker known for his work in collaboration, co-creation and crowdsourcing. He is the CEO of Victors & Spoils, the world’s first creative advertising agency built on crowdsourcing principles and, in 2011, a business named to Advertising Age’s “Agency A-List 10 to Watch” list and Mashable’s Top 5 Digital Agencies.
Before founding Victors & Spoils, Winsor was Vice President and Executive Director of Strategy and Innovation at Crispin Porter + Bogusky, helping the company become the most awarded advertising agency in the world in 2008 and 2009. He brought his co-creation philosophy to the agency that formed the underpinning of the agency’s strategy practice that fueled work such as, Dominos, “Transparency,” Best Buy’s “Twelpforce” and Microsoft’s “I’m a PC.”Prior to CPB, he founded his own company, Radar Communications, in 1998 â€“ with Nike as its first client â€“ and sold it to CP+B in 2007. At Radar, Winsor used co-creation, strategy and academic-based market intelligence tools to help some of the country’s most progressive companies learn from key voices in their communities.
Winsor was a journalist before founding Radar, building a magazine publishing company devoted to sports that included mountain biking, in-line skating and extreme skiing. In 1990, he acquired the rights to publish a then-struggling magazine, Women’s Sports & Fitness. Within three years, he turned that magazine around and launched several other highly profitable titles and events, including The Gravity Games. He sold the business to Conde Nast in 1998.
Winsor is a frequent industry speaker and respected author. He gave the speech “The Trials and Tribulations of Harnessing the Chaos of Abundance” at the Guardian UK summit in Cannes. He spoke, along with Mark-Hans Richer, CMO of Harley-Davidson, at the M50 Summit. He was recently interviewed by Harvard Business School for a study on crowdsourcing in the agency environment. He will be speaking at the 2013 Mirren conference in New York City.
His books include “Beyond the Brand: Why Engaging the Right Customers is Essential to Winning in Business,” “Spark: Be more Innovative through Co-Creation,” “Baked In: Creating Products and Businesses That Market Themselves” (with Alex Bogusky) and “Flipped: How Bottom-Up Co-Creation is Replacing Top-Down Innovation.” Baked In, a bestseller, was named an award winner in the marketing category for the 2009 800-CEO-Read Business Book Awards.
He was recently featured in the book “Pioneers of Digital” a showcase of success stories from leaders in advertising, marketing, search and social media, which credited him with turning his “â€¦wealth of communication and digital experienceâ€¦into a crowdsourcing (ad)venture.”Throughout his career Winsor has been deeply involved in the start-up and technology communities. He was a founding investor in Nau, the sustainable clothing company and has been on the board of directors of Black Diamond Equipment and Lijit Technologies.
Outside of work he pursues his passions of climbing, skiing, cycling and surfing. Among his accomplishments, he set the world record for the ascent and round-trip of Kilimanjaro.
Winsor earned a bachelor’s degree from Colorado College and an MBA from the Daniels College of Business at the University of Denver.
Rachel XanttopoulosRachel Xanttopoulos is the Product Marketing Lead for Instagram Business Verticals, the ads innovation team at Instagram. In this role, Rachel focuses on building new ad formats to create advertiser value for specific industry verticals such as Retail and Entertainment. Rachel is passionate about the intersection of tech and media—after starting her career at the Boston Consulting Group (BCG), Rachel worked as a Manager in the New York Times Corporate Strategy and Business Development Group, and then as a Product Manager for Kindle at Amazon. Rachel holds an MBA from the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University.
Joanne ZaiacAs President of the DigitasLBi New York region, Joanne is responsible for driving the development and growth of the NYC and Atlanta offices. She leads a team overseeing the strategy and execution of Digitas services across the region’s client base (including American Express, Aetna, Comcast, Delta, and Travelers). During her tenure as President, she has driven significant expansion and growth of Digitas New York, adding several Fortune 500 clients and recruiting some of the industry’s top talent. Under Joanne’s leadership, the NY & Atlanta offices received more accolades as a “Best Place to Work” than ever before in their history. Joanne has over 30 years of advertising industry experience. She has led innovative, strategic & cross channel marketing programs that have built brand equity for national brands. Her career as an integrated marketer began in general advertising at Havas Dentsu Marsteller. She then spent 14 years in Direct Marketing at Wunderman Worldwide/Young & Rubicam. She joined Digitas in 1999 to gain more experience in digital marketing. Joanne serves on the Board of Directors for Junior Achievement New York, the[email protected]Advisory Board, is an AWNY (Advertising Women New York) Executive Member, and is on the IAB (Interactive Advertising Bureau) Agency Advisory Board. She was honored in 2011 by AWNY and Working Mother Magazine as Advertising Working Mother of the Year. She is also an honored recipient of the Academy of Women Achiever’s (YWCA) Women Achiever Award. Joanne graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University with a BA in History and Literature, and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa. She lives in Manhattan with her husband and three children.
Joe ZawadzkiMediaMath’s CEO Joe Zawadzki has spent his career redefining the marketing and advertising industries through software and data sciences. He has created and scaled companies with a combined $2B in market value, personally invested in a range of start-ups and is sought after for his vision on the future of technology.
Throughout his career representing marketers at top-tier agencies and Fortune 500 companies such as AOL, American Express, IAC, Verizon and Vonage, Joe has focused on the integration of media, data and data sciences, in software. That reached its peak with the founding of MediaMath in 2007, a company credited with starting the programmatic revolution with the first demand-side platform. MediaMath’s offering, centered around the TerminalOne software, powers the marketing practice of more than 3,500 brands worldwide.
Prior to MediaMath, Joe was Founder, President and Chairman of Poindexter Systems / [x+1] a pure-play marketing optimization enterprise, where he helped found and incubate Right Media, which sold to Yahoo! in 2007. He has been an active champion of digital media and the broader NYC startup ecosystem, having made investments in over 50 companies including 33Across, Accordant, AppNexus, CreditKarma, DataMinr, Electronifi, Integral Ad Science, Namely, Optoro, Sourcepoint, and Vistar Media.
Joe serves on the Executive Committee and Board of the Direct Marketing Association, an almost century-old trade association focused on serving the interests of consumers and brands through data-driven marketing, and of Hope for Vision, an organization dedicated to raising money for the development of treatments and cures for blinding diseases, with particular focus on retinal degenerative diseases.
He is a graduate of Harvard University and was a Teaching Fellow in cosmology, set theory and the history of science. He lives in New York City with his wife, Daria, and their children Dune and Jack.
Sheng ZhouSheng Zhou serves as General Manager of Product at TikTok Ads. In this role, he is responsible for the TikTok Ads Platform development as well as management of advertiser growth for the company. He also leads the company’s efforts on a number of new monetization projects, including the recently launched TikTok Creator Marketplace.
With a rich background in business and product development in the IT space, Zhou has honed his expertise both as an entrepreneur and in senior leadership positions at several leading global technology companies, including Alibaba Group and Microsoft. Versatile and quick to adapt to rapidly changing market environments, Zhou excels at building robust teams from the ground up and cultivating early stage products alongside managing and commercializing complex business initiatives.
Prior to joining TikTok, Zhou served as Vice President at Alibaba Entertainment Group, primarily focusing on Youku’s advertising business and user operation. Before Youku was acquired by Alibaba, Zhou served as Corporate Vice President of Youku Tudou Inc., where he led R&D efforts and drove the development of advertising services and a PGC/UGC content ecosystem.
Zhou began his career with Microsoft, undertaking several product management roles throughout a 10-year tenure across multiple products, including Office, CRM, Windows Mobile and Online Advertising.
Zhou received a master’s degree in Management Information Systems from the University of Iowa and a bachelor’s degree in Computer Science from Peking University.
Julian ZilberbrandJulian Zilberbrand is the Executive Vice President of Audience Science at Viacom. Zilberbrand oversees key areas in the data strategy division including: audience onboarding and segmentation, advanced analytics and digital media executions. His team is responsible for the management and aggregation of data across all of Viacom’s media properties. Data is used to inform all aspects of media and programming at Viacom from sales to investment. His team works closely with groups across the organization to help enable a data driven approach to business which is paramount to success in today’s media landscape.
Prior to joining Viacom, Zilberbrand was Executive Vice President of Activation Standards, Insights and Technology at ZenithOptimedia. In this role, he managed the activations standards, digital operations, analytics, technology and strategic partnerships groups. Before joining Zenith, he was SVP, global digital director, strategic partnerships and technology solutions at Starcom Mediavest Group. Prior to joining the agency world in 2004, Zilberbrand held product specialist and client service roles at Eyeblaster and developed the company’s Eyeblaster University training program. Earlier in his career, he worked at Doubleclick as a project manager and technical analyst.
In addition to his work responsibilities, he held advisor roles for the IAB, 4A’s and the iMedia conferences. Zilberbrand is known as a vocal leader in the industry covering a wide array of topics from viewability with the 3MS Blue Ribbon committee to data and general industry trends. From 2013-2014, Zilberbrand chaired the Digital Committee for the Media Ratings Council and was recognized by the organization for his leadership and service. In 2014, he received the AdMonster Digital Media Leadership Award and the Marketers Choice Awards named him the Data, Analytics and Operations Innovator of the year for exemplary leadership in digital marketing.
Jianna CaronanJianna is a digital native – creating graphics, editing videos, and growing social media pages since 2010. Formerly an engineering student, she has had the pleasure of supporting brands and organizations on campus, through internships, and in a freelance capacity. Jianna received her Associates from the County College of Morris and is a proud alumna of Rutgers Business School where she received a Bachelor of Science in Marketing in 2021.
Jerry DischlerJerry Dischler is a Vice President and General Manager at Google, and oversees Google’s Advertising products including search, display, shopping, travel and video advertising, as well as analytics.
A 10+ year Ads veteran, Jerry led Google to move beyond plain text ads to deeper experiences, including the development of Ad Sitelinks and Product Listing Ads. Through various leadership roles on the team, he’s played an important role in defining the future of advertising at Google including leading the transition from desktop to mobile advertising, accelerating direct response advertising on YouTube, and developing new ad products for SMBs.
Prior to his current role, Jerry led the product and engineering teams for ads on Google’s owned and operated properties (Search, YouTube, Maps, Gmail, Discover), buying platforms (Google Ads, Search Ads 360, Display & Video 360), and Google’s home-grown sales and support platform. Earlier in his career at Google, Jerry led Google’s commerce products, including Google Checkout (now Google Pay) and Google Product Search (now Google Shopping).
Before Google, Jerry served as the Director of Engineering at Avolent where he was instrumental in developing the company’s award-winning billing and payment products. He also worked in engineering and leadership roles at Hyperion, Sana Security, and Accenture, where his work focused on enterprise billing, customer care, and security software.
Jerry earned his bachelor’s degree from the University of Chicago and his MBA from The Wharton School of Business.
Chad EngelgauChad Engelgau serves as Acxiom’s President and Chief Executive Officer, providing strategic leadership to the organization, which focuses on helping brands better use data, identity and technology solutions to understand people and create growth for their businesses. Chad is also a founding member of Acxiom’s IDEA (Inclusion, Diversity, Equity and Awareness) Council and the executive sponsor for two of Acxiom’s Business Resource Groups, Acxiom Women LEAD and Acxiom Black Employee Network.
Previously, Chad served as Global Chief Data Strategist at Kinesso, the marketing intelligence unit of The Interpublic Group of Companies, Inc. (IPG), Acxiom’s parent company. Chad joined Kinesso after spending 13 years at Acxiom, where he held a variety of key leadership roles, including Chief Marketing Officer and Head of Strategy. Over his tenure he was responsible for leading data and identity product management and strategy as well as product marketing.
Before joining Acxiom, Chad spent nine years at Dell Inc., rising from product engineering manager to corporate strategist for the Texas-based technology company. Prior to his years at Dell, Chad held various product management and technical roles at other enterprise companies.
Anne FrisbieAnne is SVP of Global Brand & Programmatic at InMobi. Anne joined InMobi in 2008. Prior to InMobi, Anne managed revenue for Yahoo! as Vice President of Category and Sales Intelligence, providing strategic insights and digital media solutions to leading brands and agencies. A digital-media industry veteran of over 20 years, Anne’s experience also includes cofounding an e-commerce company, executing some of the first search marketing campaigns in the industry at AltaVista and Overture, and directing publisher development at what is now most famously known as Elon Musk’s first start-up, Zip2.
Anne is an active member in the mobile community. In 2011 she was selected as one of Mobile Entertainment Magazine’s Top 10 Women in Mobile and in 2012 became Business Insiders #6 in their Most Powerful Woman in Mobile Advertising. In 2011 and 2012, Anne Frisbie served on the North America board of the MMA. In 2013, Anne was named a co-chair for the IAB’s mobile advertising committee, and a Board of Director member for the IAB’s Mobile Marketing Center of Excellence.
Anne holds a Bachelor Degree in Economics from Georgetown University. Anne is an avid wine collector, cocktail maker, loves playing duplicate bridge and is a happy mom of three children.
Barbara KrzanickaBarbara has been an Executive Assistant for 20 years, 4 years have been spent in the not-for-profit world.
She has a varied background in complex calendar management, project management, and events coordination.
Barbara holds a B.A. in Criminal Justice from John Jay College of Criminal Justice.
Jonathan MoralesJonathan Morales has a decade of experience helping nonprofits derive value from their data. In his most recent role at NPR, Jonathan led the fundraising and finance teams’ inhouse migration to Salesforce, leveraging the platform’s flexibility to support network fundraising, optimize complex business processes, and surface relevant information. Jonathan previously held database management roles at the USO and the National Trust for Historic Preservation, and consulted for other nonprofits. Jonathan holds degrees in history and music from Georgetown University and Oberlin College and Conservatory.
Ryan Polley PolleyRyan Polley is the Chief Product Officer at Kargo. In his role, Ryan is responsible for product strategy and delivery, leading the product and engineering teams at Kargo. With almost two decades of experience in the media industry, he started his career at RealNetworks and served as an executive at ComScore and Rubicon Project most recently. Today, Ryan’s passionate about enabling advertising technologies that allow brands to tell compelling stories. He’s a graduate of the University of Washington in Seattle and currently lives near San Francisco, CA.
Dwenne SaindoryDwenne is a graduate of Murray Koppelman School of Business. She earned her M.S focusing on Global Business and received her undergraduate degree in Marketing from York College. She is a fashion content creator, educator, and philanthropist.
Kevin SolingerAs Group VP, Product Management at Xandr, Kevin oversees the product platform supporting Xandr’s Invest and Monetize products, across both Digital and Linear TV. He previously led Xandr’s platform integration of enterprise data, supporting both the Media and Marketplace businesses with identity solutions, audience building, and attribution.
Having joined AppNexus in 2011 prior to its acquisition by AT&T and the launch of Xandr in 2018, Kevin has held a number of roles across the company in Product Architecture, Research and Development, and Product Management. He led the integration of viewability measurement technology into the AppNexus exchange, as well as the development of optimization and transaction-related features, for which he is co-inventor of two patents. Kevin has also served as product lead for partner integrations, reporting and analytics, and inventory quality.
Prior to AppNexus, Kevin was a Senior Engineer at the New York Stock Exchange, responsible for the development and management of mission-critical, low-latency market data platforms.
Kevin holds a Bachelor of Applied Science in Computer Science and a Bachelor of Arts in Economics from the University of Pennsylvania.
Katie StroudKatie Stroud is Senior Product Manager with IAB Tech Lab, currently managing products for improving ad experiences in ad tech. Katie has been working with IAB since 2011 on products for video, creative formatting, ad delivery, and rich media interactions in video and display. Nearly native to the Pacific Northwest, Katie enjoys the rain, long bike rides (sometimes at the same time), and finding ways to improve ad experiences for brands, publishers, and consumers.
David CohenDavid Cohen joined IAB in April 2020 as President and was named Chief Executive Officer in September 2020. Cohen is a widely respected advertising agency leader who, prior to IAB, served as President, North America for MAGNA, Interpublic Group’s (IPG) centralized media intelligence, investment, and innovation arm. In this role, Cohen was responsible for more than $20 billion in media spend. During his tenure, Cohen structured and executed large global transactions on behalf of IPG and its clients, with such major IAB member companies as Facebook, Google, Microsoft, Spotify, Twitter, and Verizon Media.
Prior to MAGNA, Cohen served as Chief Investment Officer of UM, ensuring that digital innovation, data, and technology acumen flowed throughout the agency to drive performance. From 2001 to 2011, Cohen served in critical, transformational roles at UM during the explosive growth of digital advertising, including Chief Media Officer, Chief Digital Officer, and Executive Vice President, U.S. Director of Digital Communications. In the late 1990’s, Cohen was responsible for launching and building IPG’s digital practice.
Cohen has a long history of working with trade organizations including IAB and 4As, where he served as chairman of the Interactive Marketing Committee from 2009-2013. He has also been instrumental in initiating several vital industry-wide programs, including the Future of Television, facilitated by EY. Cohen is a Queens native, with a bachelor’s degree in communications from Adelphi University. He was recognized by Adweek as a “Media All Star” and was part of the “Adweek 50” in 2012.
In 2016, David was elected to the Board of Directors of Partnership with Children a non-profit whose mission is to strengthen the emotional, social, and cognitive skills of vulnerable children in New York City to help them succeed in school, society, and life.
David enjoys spending time with his wife and two teenage daughters. A self-described gadget-geek and sometimes fitness fanatic – he ran the NYC Marathon in 2014 and 2019 and Boston Marathon in 2016.
David CohenDavid Cohen joined IAB in April 2020 as President and was named Chief Executive Officer in September 2020. Cohen is a widely respected advertising agency leader who, prior to IAB, served as President, North America for MAGNA, Interpublic Group’s (IPG) centralized media intelligence, investment, and innovation arm. In this role, Cohen was responsible for more than $20 billion in media spend. During his tenure, Cohen structured and executed large global transactions on behalf of IPG and its clients, with such major IAB member companies as Facebook, Google, Microsoft, Spotify, Twitter, and Verizon Media.
Prior to MAGNA, Cohen served as Chief Investment Officer of UM, ensuring that digital innovation, data, and technology acumen flowed throughout the agency to drive performance. From 2001 to 2011, Cohen served in critical, transformational roles at UM during the explosive growth of digital advertising, including Chief Media Officer, Chief Digital Officer, and Executive Vice President, U.S. Director of Digital Communications. In the late 1990’s, Cohen was responsible for launching and building IPG’s digital practice.
Cohen has a long history of working with trade organizations including IAB and 4As, where he served as chairman of the Interactive Marketing Committee from 2009-2013. He has also been instrumental in initiating several vital industry-wide programs, including the Future of Television, facilitated by EY. Cohen is a Queens native, with a bachelor’s degree in communications from Adelphi University. He was recognized by Adweek as a “Media All Star” and was part of the “Adweek 50” in 2012.
In 2016, David was elected to the Board of Directors of Partnership with Children a non-profit whose mission is to strengthen the emotional, social, and cognitive skills of vulnerable children in New York City to help them succeed in school, society, and life.
David enjoys spending time with his wife and two teenage daughters. A self-described gadget-geek and sometimes fitness fanatic – he ran the NYC Marathon in 2014 and 2019 and Boston Marathon in 2016.
Anthony KatsurAnthony Katsur is a media technology veteran with more than twenty-five years of executive leadership and technical experience at innovative technology companies in the digital media industry.
Most recently, Anthony was SVP, Strategy, Operations and Corporate Development at Nexstar Media Group, Inc., the largest local broadcaster in the United States. Anthony was responsible for overseeing strategy, technology platforms and corporate development across Nexstar’s portfolio of digital assets.
Prior to Nexstar, Anthony served as President of Sonobi, where he implemented their product and go to market strategy around people-based marketing. Anthony recruited, and led highly effective teams while driving strategic partnerships with leading media companies, agencies and brands.
Prior to Sonobi, Anthony held global leadership roles at Rubicon Project as EVP of Business Operations and General Manager of Buyer Cloud. He also held global executive roles at MediaMath and Maxifier, where he served as CEO. Earlier in his career, he joined DoubleClick via the acquisition of NetGravity where he lead multiple engineering divisions and also fulfilled several product leadership and general management roles.
Anthony is an active participant at industry conferences, speaking about the latest ends in advertising at the National Association of Broadcasters, AdAge’s Brand Summit, Advertising Week, Broadcasting & Cable, AdMonsters and GABBCON. He has been quoted on industry trends and provided thought leadership in The Wall Street Journal, AdAge, Adweek, AdExchanger, MediaPost, Econsultancy and Digiday, among others.
Michael LebowitzMichael Lebowitz is Founder and CEO of Big Spaceship, a globally-recognized marketing agency that creates connected experiences, products and services. Since launching the agency in 2000, he has defined the strategy and vision for Big Spaceship, while working closely with the agency’s clients, including BMW, Capital One, Google Play, Google Maps, Ken Burns, Nestle-Purina, Organic Valley, Samsung, West Elm, and YouTube.
At Big Spaceship Michael has assembled “a crack team of digital inventors,” according to Fast Company’s “Most Innovative Companies” list, and has led the company to be named one of Advertising Age and Crain’s New York Business Best Places to Work for multiple years in a row. Big Spaceship’s multidisciplinary team structure and progressive culture have been profiled by Harvard Business School, with the case study now taught at business schools in 40 countries.
Speaking on creativity, innovation and the evolution of business, Michael speaks across the globe and has engaged audiences at top industry events including Cannes Festival of Creativity, SXSW, Click:NY, Forge Conference, Advertising Week, Click:London and ad:tech, as well as at business schools including NYU Stern, Long Island University and SLU’s Institute for Private Business.
He frequently chairs and sits on juries for creative awards and influential industry organizations including the IAB Agency Advisory Board and annual MIXX Awards, The One Club, Society of Digital Agencies and The International Academy of Digital Arts & Sciences, among others. And has led the agency to win countless awards of its own including an Emmy Award nomination for the agency’s work with HBO Voyeur, Cannes Lions, Clios, Webbys, Andys, and One Show Interactive Pencils, as well as numerous IAB MIXX, Webby, Shorty, FWA, Communication Arts, W3 and Pixel Awards, among others. Michael was also named among the 2010 Creativity 50 and the 2008 OMMA Online All-Stars.
Orchid RichardsonOrchid Richardson serves as the newly appointed Vice President and Managing Director, IAB Programmatic+Data Center. She is charged with driving the Center’s mission to define boundaries, reduce friction, and increase value along the data supply chain, for consumers, marketers, and the ecosystem that supports them.
Before joining the IAB Data Center, Orchid was General Manager of Publisher & Media Solutions for 33Across, Inc. where she was responsible for leading the global business strategy & development for both the company’s growth and the growth of their publisher partners. Her successes include leading the development and integration of the 33Across Real Platform with over 250 demand partner, developing a product suite that was the catalyst for the company’s pivot into programmatic and launching the Real Platform in 12 countries located in EMEA, LATAM and North America.
Orchid also served as Head of Digital Operations for Hearst Magazines Digital Media. There, she was responsible for architecting the Hearst Audience Exchange that represented the consolidation of Hearst’s audience data for multiple Hearst corporate units including Magazines, Newspaper, Entertainment, and Broadcast on to one platform for strategic company-wide initiatives.
Before Hearst, Orchid was Senior Director of Advertising Operations & Strategy for BET Networks within the Digital Group. Orchid has also served in management roles at other leading digital companies including Everyday Health, Singer Direct (an Omnicom Media Group Company) and Multimedia Solutions.
Orchid is actively involved in the advertising community, having held leadership roles in key industry trade organizations. Additionally, she is an active member of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc., the Metro-Manhattan (NY) Chapter of the Links, Incorporated and the Westchester Chapter of Jack & Jill of America. Orchid also serves as a board member and fundraising chair of the Ujamaa Community Development Corporation which has built over $100 million in affordable housing in Westchester County, New York.
She is an alumna of Spelman College and New York University’s Stern School of Business where she holds a degree in Business Administration & International Business.
A citizen of the world having visited over 30 countries, Orchid is based in New York where she lives with her husband, Eugene Uzamere, Esq. and their children, Owen, Addison, Ivie, Eki, and Nosa.
Zoe SoonZoe Soon has 10+ years of experience building products in technology-driven businesses with a heavy focus on mobile. Six years ago Zoe flew 21 hours from Sydney to NYC for a 30min coffee meeting which led to her first job in NYC. Since then she’s worked with three major New York based media companies, The New York Times, Condé Nast and Business Insider on projects ranging from location-based apps to paywalls. Zoe began her career as a user researcher and UX design consultant working with three of the top five banks in Australia. She was then hired to establish a user insights practice at Fairfax Media, a leading Australian news and media conglomerate. Here she led the user research for the flagship news apps which won Best Mobile News Product at the 2012 Australian Mobile Awards and went on to become product lead for the news sites. In this role she launched a content paywall and a unified user data system to diversify revenue and enable more targeted marketing.
Prior to joining the IAB Zoe was General Manager of apps and email at Business Insider where she was charged with defining the go-to market strategy for these platforms. In this role Zoe launched Insider Inc’s first OTT apps across Apple, Amazon Fire and Roku offering advertisers cross-platform video digital distribution and access to an audience that generates over 2 billion views each month.
Zoe has a Masters in Organizational Psychology and lives in New York. She enjoys burning pancakes, Cuban salsa dancing and talking to strangers in line.
Krishan BhatiaKrishan Bhatia serves as President & Chief Business Officer for NBCUniversal’s Advertising Sales division, reporting to Linda Yaccarino, Chairman, Global Advertising & Partnerships. Bhatia, with the help of his 500-person team, oversees Digital & Advanced Advertising Sales as well as the division’s One Platform Strategy, Partnerships, Product, Technology, Measurement and Operations functions — spanning a portfolio of TV, streaming and digital assets that reaches 230 Million viewers every month, including the company’s ad-supported streaming platform Peacock.
In 2021, Bhatia launched the company’s Enterprise Data unit to develop NBCUnified, the first-party data platform that serves NBCUniversal’s entire portfolio – including all TV & streaming properties, the NBC News Group, Universal Filmed Entertainment and Universal Parks & Resorts.
Bhatia also manages the corporate partnerships with Comcast Advertising, Freewheel and Sky Media, as well NBCU’s advertising partnerships with Amazon, Apple, Google/YouTube, Roku, Snap, The Trade Desk, TikTok, Twitter and others.
Bhatia took on his role at NBCUniversal after Comcast acquired the company in 2011 and led the integration of the two companies’ advertising businesses. He joined Comcast in 2005 as a founding executive team member of Comcast Interactive Media, where he played an instrumental role in creating and growing the digital media business for Comcast through acquisitions and partnerships.
Prior to Comcast, Bhatia was a Principal with Booz Allen Hamilton’s Global Media & Entertainment Practice in New York, advising many of the world’s leading media and technology companies.
Bhatia serves as chairman of the IAB and a board member of OpenAP.
Pooja MidhaPooja Midha is President of true[X], the most effective engagement advertising platform for on-demand, interactive media, leading the company’s daily operations and long-term strategy. As President, her mission is to grow true[X]’s roster of advertiser and premium publisher partnerships; expand its industry-leading ad products to create value for consumers, advertisers, and media companies; and further true[X]’s active role as an advocate for high-quality, measurable advertising across platforms.
Pooja most recently spent more than five years as senior vice president of digital ad sales and operations for the ABC Television Network, where she oversaw sales, strategy, and revenue operations for all of ABC’s digital properties — the ABC app, abc.com, abcnews.com, GMA on Yahoo, ABC on Hulu, Oscars digital, all ABC dynamically ad-served set top box video on demand, and all social and new media platforms. Pooja previously had worked for ten years at Viacom Media Networks, including serving as senior vice president of digital ad sales for the Music and Entertainment Group.
Pooja currently serves as vice chair of the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB) Video Board, co-chair of the IAB Long Form Video Committee, and is a member of the IAB CRO Council. Pooja also serves as a member of the Upstream Seller Forum Advisory Board. She holds a B.A. from Lehigh University and an MBA from Columbia Business School. She has also completed the National Association of Multi-Ethnicity in Communications (NAMIC) Executive Leadership Development Program from UCLA’s Anderson School of Management.
Pooja currently resides in New York City with her husband, Allan Beaufour.
Randall RothenbergRandall Rothenberg is the Executive Chair of the Interactive Advertising Bureau, the trade association for digital media and marketing in the United States. Among the IAB’s 750 member companies are such major platforms as Google, Facebook, Microsoft, and Snap; the nation’s most important ad-supported media companies, including The New York Times, Walt Disney Co., NBC Universal, ViacomCBS, Hearst Magazines, Spotify, Verizon Media, Hulu, Warner Media, LinkedIn, and Meredith; incumbent and disruptor brands, including Coca-Cola, Walmart, Procter & Gamble, Hubble Contacts, ThirdLove, General Motors, Johnson & Johnson, and Citigroup; and scores of technology and data companies, among them Mediamath, LiveRamp, Quantcast, and Pubmatic.
With these members and its 47 affiliate associations on every inhabited continent, the IAB and its sister technology-standards group, the IAB Tech Lab, serve as the digital marketing industry’s public policy and lobbying organization, market and consumer research center, training and development base, and hub for the development of standards and best practices.
Mr. Rothenberg joined the IAB in January 2007 as President and Chief Executive Officer, and led the organization until becoming Executive Chair in September 2020. During his tenure, the organization became one of the largest and most influential media and marketing trade bodies in the world, helping to develop technical standards, self-regulation, government regulation, market and consumer research, and professional development programs to protect consumer privacy, foster brand and media revenue growth, improve data security, and reduce supply chain friction in the digital marketing industry.
Prior to his IAB role, Mr. Rothenberg was the Chief Marketing Officer and Senior Director of Intellectual Capital at Booz Allen Hamilton, the international strategy and technology consulting firm, where he oversaw business development, knowledge management, and thought leadership activities, and directed the award-winning quarterly business magazine strategy+business, Strategy+Business Books, www.strategy-business.com, and other electronic and print publications for senior business executives.
Earlier in his career, Mr. Rothenberg spent six years at The New York Times, where he was the technology editor and politics editor of the Sunday magazine, the daily advertising columnist, and a media and marketing reporter. For 10 years, he was a marketing and media columnist for Advertising Age. Mr. Rothenberg has written for a score of major national magazines, among them Esquire, GQ, The Nation, The New York Times Magazine, and New York Magazine. He is the author of four books, including Where the Suckers Moon: An Advertising Story (Alfred A. Knopf, 1994), a critically-acclaimed chronicle of the birth, evolution, and death of a single advertising campaign.
Mr. Rothenberg, an avid nature, urban, and portrait photographer, serves on the Board of Directors of the International Center of Photography and the Board of Overseers of the Columbia Journalism Review. He received an undergraduate degree in Classics from Princeton and lives in New York City.
Alysia BorsaAlysia Borsa is President of Meredith Digital of Meredith Corporation’s National Media Group, the leading multi-platform media company focused on women – reaching 95% of all U.S. women and more than 190 million unduplicated American consumers every month. Borsa oversees all digital strategy, content, products, technology, sales, marketing, e-commerce and operations for the company’s 40+ iconic brands, including PEOPLE, Better Homes & Gardens, Allrecipes, Southern Living and REAL SIMPLE.
Since joining Meredith a decade ago, Borsa has served in several executive roles, including EVP/Chief Data Officer, Chief Business Officer and Chief Marketing Officer. Her distinguished record and forward-thinking approach have been instrumental in Meredith achieving many key milestones, including the establishment of the Meredith Data Studio. This suite of advertising solutions leverages the company’s rich, proprietary first-party data and predictive insights capabilities, helping to inform its partners’ marketing, product and business strategies. Under Borsa’s leadership, Meredith has also expanded its business partnerships with a wide array of retailers and blue chip marketers.
Prior to Meredith, Borsa held senior positions in the technology, telecommunications and consulting sectors. She worked at Nokia, Comcast and Accenture, developing and executing strategies to grow new and legacy businesses.
Borsa serves on the ANA’s Data & Technology Growth Council and the boards of directors of the Interactive Advertising Bureau; AdLedger, an industry blockchain trade group; and 4-H, a nonprofit youth development organization.
Alia AbbasAlia Abbas is a strategy and operations executive with extensive global digital transformation experience supporting Fortune 500 companies across various sectors and geographies driving organizational effectiveness and alignment and overcoming and embracing market disruptions. Her expertise in strategic planning, operational excellence, and program and change management, coupled with her broad background and strong cross-functional experience has exposed her to a wide range of business situations, challenges, and workstyles over her two- decade career.
Most recently, Alia was the Head of Business Operations for the technology organization at The Estee Lauder Companies where she collaborated across global leadership teams and the broader organization to facilitate and develop their digital transformation strategy and operating model, and simplify, digitize, and integrate core business processes as ELC embarked on their digital customer experience transformation. Prior to that, Alia led the strategic planning and execution of Time Warner’s unprecedented enterprise-wide strategic and operational transformation efforts in support of the company’s digital initiatives.
She holds an MBA from Cornell University’s S.C. Johnson Graduate School of Management, an MS from Stevens Institute of Technology in Management Information Systems, and a BS in Computer Science from Drexel University. Alia is on the Board of Advisor’s at Seton Hall University’s Skillman School of Business Customer Experience Program, and on the Board of Trustees and DEI committee of Trailblazers Camp, a nonprofit that empowers youth to build life values through outdoor experiential programs. Alia is a native New York-er and avid traveler.
Sheryl GoldsteinA “net vet” with 20+ years of driving meaningful revenue through insights into action consultative selling in the dynamic digital landscape (Yahoo, AOL, About.com). Adept at building successful sales teams, developing go-to-market sales strategies and gaining consensus across company divisions. Experience includes mobile, tech (DSP, PMP, Exchange) and data driven solutions, social media and word of mouth marketing, Website development and design, online media and marketing and cross-platform media experience (TV, Radio and live-event). A passionate leader and relationship builder who is committed to exceeding goals and expectations for clients, her team and company.
Michael HahnMichael Hahn is Executive Vice President & General Counsel at IAB and IAB Tech Lab. Michael has responsibility for all legal matters, including the direction of legal strategy, privacy compliance, antitrust compliance, intellectual property rights issues, and general corporate matters. Michael is also responsible for serving as an advocate for the digital advertising industry on common legal issues affecting member companies.
Michael joined IAB and IAB Tech Lab from Lowenstein Sandler LLP where he served as Vice Chair of the firm’s Antitrust Practice Group. In that role, he provided clients with strategic counsel around competition, distribution and governance issues. In the area of litigation, Michael’s matters have included multiparty class action antitrust defense representation.
Michael served previously as Co-Chair of the New Jersey State Bar Association Antitrust Law Committee. He also previously served on the Editorial Advisory Board of Competition Law 360 and the Advisory Board of the American Bar Association Antitrust Section’s Civil Torts & RICO Committee. Michael frequently publishes on a range of legal and policy issues.
Michael earned his B.A. in History and Political Science from Rutgers University, M.P.P. from Georgetown University and J.D. for Georgetown University Law Center.
Carryl Pierre-DrewsCarryl Pierre-Drews is EVP, Chief Marketing Officer at the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB) where she is responsible for providing executive leadership and management of the IAB marketing and communications organization and activities to forward the IAB’s position as a digital, marketing, and media industry thought leader and agenda-setter. Carryl has stewardship of the IAB Brand inclusive of Events, Marketing, PR, Digital, Social, Mobile, Video, and Audio channels with the goal of elevating IAB’s profile with media and tech CEOs, CMOs, and the marketing and advertising industry at large.
Previously, Carryl held the title of Vice President of Marketing at Fullscreen, a next-gen social marketing agency, where she built and led the agency’s brand marketing, PR, digital/social channels, influencer engagements, and global industry activations featuring marketers from American Eagle, AT&T, HP, Marriott, Mars, Mattel, Visa and more. Carryl was instrumental in catalyzing key strategic decisions that drove business growth, elevated visibility, and increased shareholder value positioning Fullscreen for the AT&T acquisition in 2018 and eventual WarnerMedia integration in 2019. Prior to Fullscreen, Carryl was Senior Vice President of Strategic Marketing at USA Network, a division of NBCUniversal, where she led the integrated marketing, communications strategy, and client experiences teams.
Carryl serves as Chair of the Marketing & Communications Committee of Pet Partners Board of Directors, where she helps devise strategies to further communicate and expand the vital role of therapy animals in our lives. As a therapy animal team with her dog Mika, Carryl has seen firsthand the effect therapy animals have on overall health and well-being. Carryl is also passionate about creating a culture of inclusion and diversity in the advertising, marketing, and media industry and has been an active member of She Runs It, an organization invested in women’s achievement, for 19 years, with six spent on the Board (2012-2018). She was honored twice by CableFax Magazine as one of the most influential minorities in cable — in 2013 “The Leaders” and in 2012 “The Influentials.” In 2019 Carryl was nominated and became a founding member of Chief, a private network focused on connecting and supporting women leaders.
Lartease TiffithLartease Tiffith is the Executive Vice President for Public Policy at the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB). He leads IAB’s public policy team, which is responsible for advocating on behalf of IAB’s more than 700 member companies on complex issues, including consumer privacy, data security, global trade, international data transfer rules, and more. Lartease also leads IAB’s Public Policy Council, the marketing and media industry’s largest legislative and regulatory advisory group, with senior executives from more than 200 companies contributing to solutions to advance consumer benefits and economic growth. He also plays an important role in supporting IAB Tech Labs’ efforts to align the industry’s technical development and best practices.
Lartease joined IAB from Amazon, where he led the company’s public policy work around advertising, privacy, security, data governance, cross-border data flows, and consumer protection issues. In his role, he provided counsel to internal legal and business partners on global public policy matters to help guide the development of products, services, and internal policies. During his tenure at Amazon, INSIDER named him as one of the key players in politics and the tech world.
Prior to joining Amazon, Lartease served as Senior Counsel to then-U.S. Senator Kamala Harris, and Counsel to U.S. Senator Dianne Feinstein. Before working in the Senate, he practiced law at two international law firms (Kirkland & Ellis LLP and O’Melveny & Myers LLP) and the U.S. Department of Justice. Lartease began his legal career as a Law Clerk to the Honorable Roger L. Gregory, Circuit Judge, on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit.
Lartease earned his B.A., J.D., and M.B.A. from Northwestern University.
Jeanie CarstensenJeanie Carstensen is the Senior Vice President, Finance and Operations of Finance and Operations. She joined the IAB in October 2015 with 20+ years experience in the media and entertainment industries. Most recently she was with Comcast/NBCUniversal as a strategic finance and administration leader supporting the Cable Ad Sales Division. Prior to that she held finance leadership roles at Viacom/MTV Networks in New York and MTV Europe in London, England.
Jeanie holds a BA in Finance from Iona College, is an avid traveler, and volunteers with Monday Night Hospitality serving restaurant style meals to those in need.
Rick BergerRick has significant experience across all sides of the marketing ecosystem including brand management, agency, media, digital, ad tech, data, analytics, and attribution. He started his career working on blue chip brands for several major NY ad agencies and then transitioned to the brand side at L’Oreal. After a successful stint launching and managing haircare brands, Rick took on a role running sales for Next Generation Radio, an industry association charged with generating new on-air and digital revenue. In nine years, NGR generated over $125M in new sales to the industry. After leaving NGR, Rick ran the NY Sales office for Alloy, helping to launch the largest teen ad network. Rick has also run sales teams at Music Mogul (a music start-up), Interactive One (a multi-cultural publisher), Specific Media/Viant (the largest ad network) and inPowered (a native platform). Most recently, Rick has been with Conversant, the identity platform and digital arm of Epsilon. In this role, Rick has been the lead revenue generator for Conversant’s emerging Restaurant segment.
Craig ColemanCraig Coleman joins IAB with over 15 years of expertise developing marketing programs, messaging, and positioning strategies for IAB member brands such as USA TODAY, NBCUniversal, and MTV. He is excited to raise the profile of the IAB brand and positioning IAB as the industry thought leader in media and marketing.
Most recently, Coleman was VP, Client Solutions and Product Marketing for Gannett Digital and USA TODAY where he led digital product marketing and client solutions. Under his leadership, USA TODAY launched the award winning Gravity unit and introduced digital partnerships in virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR).
In previous roles, Coleman served as Vice President, Marketing for Screenvision where he launched a new branded content offering combining media, movie studio and partner assets. While at NBCUniversal, he was brand manager of the lifestyle brands Green is Universal, Healthy at NBCU and Hispanics at NBCU and oversaw the development and implementation of integrated ad sales marketing programs for advertisers across NBCUniversal’s portfolio including the first-ever movie studio program with Sony. Prior to joining NBCUniversal in 2010, Coleman directed all marketing and communications for the fastest growing kid’s network, Nicktoons Network. Coleman also co-produced the Nicktoons Network Animation Festival driving festival submissions and partnerships with LEGO, Addicting Games and mtvU making it the largest animation festival in North America.
Coleman earned a Bachelor’s degree from University of Connecticut, and currently resides in CT with his wife, Evan, and daughter, Bennett.
Libby MorganLibby Morgan comes to IAB with over twenty years of agency and consulting experience, spending most of her career at the intersection of Marketing, Technology and Innovation. Most recently, she served as the Global President of MRM Commerce, where she launched the Strategy, Consulting, and Digital Transformation practice. Previous positions also include President of The Born Group, where she focused on Digital Marketing, Commerce and Content, and Managing Director of iCrossing (part of Hearst), where she focused on Media and Digital Marketing. Throughout her career, she has had the good fortune to partner with clients such as Nestle, General Motors, Anheuser Busch, American Express, and Geico, among others, to help them achieve their business goals through interactive solutions.
Shailley SinghShailley brings several years of product management experience in Digital advertising at Yahoo and Say Media building products for Mobile advertising, Ad Operations, Targeting solutions and integrating data platforms. Shailley has supported and worked with multiple IAB initiatives in the past namely MRAID and Mobile Rising Stars specifications. At Yahoo, he worked on creating innovative ad experiences for mobile and tablet platforms as well as native formats. Shailley has a diverse background as a product leader, consultant and entrepreneur building and sustaining high performing teams at both large organizations as well as venture funded startups like Paypal, Yahoo, Say Media, Serus, Accenture, PwC. By way of qualifications, Shailley has an MBA and Chemical engineering degree.
Alexandra SalomonAlexandra Salomon joined the IAB Tech Lab in 2018 to lead global business development efforts for the organization, spearheading growth around the world and across the value chain. After heading up International for the Interactive Advertising Bureau for 5 years, she brings more than 25 years of business development and global marketing experience to the team, including two decades specifically in Digital.
A veteran in online advertising and interactive marketing, Salomon has worked for leading brands such as AOL, Yahoo, Zinio, and Disney Publishing. She was born in the U.K, grew up in France, and is not only multi-lingual but truly multicultural.
Angelina EngA seasoned executive with 24+ years of digital media, marketing and operations experience, Angelina Eng has focused her career on supporting agencies and brands to define, build and manage digital media and marketing efforts while enabling teams to operationally work efficiently and effectively with both internal and external partners and platforms. She’s been responsible for the development and management of internal systems and workflow, establishment of deliverable standards, designing ad trafficking and tracking guidelines, implementation of emerging platforms, as well as establishing best practices at companies such as Morgan Stanley, Merkle, Dentsu Aegis and Publicis Modem.
Over the years, She has been involved with multiple organizations and events to help define, establish and advocate some of the industry standards that we see in today’s digital media ecosystem (such as ad verification/brand safety, ad fraud, viewability and programmatic, social, etc)Angelina has been awarded the AdMonsters 2018 Power List, IAB Data Rockstar 2016 and AdMonsters Digital Media Leadership Award 2016.
Amber MuratAmber is the Vice President of Human Resources for IAB. She stepped into the role in May 2022 and has oversight of the organization’s human resource functions, including culture, diversity, inclusion, and all people-focused initiatives.
Amber is an Equity Designer, People Strategist, and an Authentic People & Culture leader. Amber joins IAB with 15 years of experience; in Human Resources leadership roles within nonprofit, mission-driven organizations. She brings a unique mix of human resources, executive coaching, and thought leadership expertise.
Most recently, Amber was the Head of People & Culture at Sollis Health, where she launched the company’s first-ever human resources strategy and led the organization through a culture transformation. She holds a master’s degree in Human Resources Development from Fordham University, a senior professional human resources designation, and multiple professional coaching certifications from iPEC & IIN. In 2020, Disruptor Magazine named Amber one of the Top 30 Life Coaches to Look Out For in 2021.
Eric JohnEric John leads IAB’s Media Center, a dedicated unit within the IAB whose mission is to simplify the video supply chain, providing best practices and education for brands, agencies, and media companies to drive continued growth through the evolving convergence of television and digital video. Eric drives the center’s efforts in the development of market-making research, industry standards and best practices and buyer/seller terms and conditions. Before joining the IAB, Eric led digital services and strategy at the Alliance for Audited Media and the MPA. Eric also served as global director of publisher marketing at Nokia, managing the company’s world-wide mobile app developer ecosystem. Prior to Nokia, Eric launched and led advertiser brand engagement solutions for Yahoo!, creating advanced, data-driven video, mobile and interactive campaigns for brands such as Pepsi, Loreal and Nikon. Eric began his career in internet advertising at DoubleClick (Google) where he served in business and product development within the DART for Publishers (DFP) and DART for Advertisers (DFA) business units where he launched the industry’s first post-click “Spotlight” measurement tools. Eric is an alumnus of Miami of Ohio (BA) and Indiana University (MA) and is a graduate of Columbia University’s Product Management Program.
Read articles by Eric John.
Zoe SoonZoe Soon has 10+ years of experience building products in technology-driven businesses with a heavy focus on mobile. Six years ago Zoe flew 21 hours from Sydney to NYC for a 30min coffee meeting which led to her first job in NYC. Since then she’s worked with three major New York based media companies, The New York Times, Condé Nast and Business Insider on projects ranging from location-based apps to paywalls. Zoe began her career as a user researcher and UX design consultant working with three of the top five banks in Australia. She was then hired to establish a user insights practice at Fairfax Media, a leading Australian news and media conglomerate. Here she led the user research for the flagship news apps which won Best Mobile News Product at the 2012 Australian Mobile Awards and went on to become product lead for the news sites. In this role she launched a content paywall and a unified user data system to diversify revenue and enable more targeted marketing.
Prior to joining the IAB Zoe was General Manager of apps and email at Business Insider where she was charged with defining the go-to market strategy for these platforms. In this role Zoe launched Insider Inc’s first OTT apps across Apple, Amazon Fire and Roku offering advertisers cross-platform video digital distribution and access to an audience that generates over 2 billion views each month.
Zoe has a Masters in Organizational Psychology and lives in New York. She enjoys burning pancakes, Cuban salsa dancing and talking to strangers in line.
Chris BruderleChris Bruderle brings over 20 years of experience in Data/Web Analytics and Media Market Research at premium Digital and Muti-Platform web publishers including The Daily Beast, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, Conde Nast Publications and This Old House Ventures.
Most recently, Chris was VP, Analytics & Research at The Daily Beast where he spent nearly 7 years and was responsible for the tracking, analysis and reporting of The Daily Beast’s O&O site and off-platform data/analytics for Senior/Corporate Management, Editorial, Advertising Sales, Product/Engineering, Audience/Business Development, Social Media and PR. He established the company-wide Editorial Analytics and Advertising Sales data and research stacks which included, among others, Google Analytics, Parse.ly, Krux DMP, Optimizely, comScore, Kantar, Samba, Newswhip, Crowd Tangle, Buzzsumo, and CrazyEgg.
Prior to The Daily Beast, Chris spent 5 years as Associate and Acting Director at Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia where he directed the correspondence and development of all research-based strategies supporting the Advertising Sales and Marketing staffs of each of the MSLO media brands and platforms across digital, mobile/tablet, TV, print and radio.
Chris started his career at BBDO as an Assistant Media Planner where he most notably completed the “Media Training Program”.
Chris earned a Bachelor’s of Arts in English and Communications from Fairfield University in Fairfield, Connecticut.
Alex ConeAlex joined Tech Lab in early 2020 after 7 years at Xandr (formerly AppNexus) where he lead multiple product and engineering groups to deliver a broad range of successful ad tech products. Alex stood up Xandr’s Privacy product and engineering capability in 2018 and since realized digital privacy is the area of advertising where he can make the most impact to the industry and consumers. Alex believes Tech Lab–with its global reach, technology focus, diverse membership and trade group relationships–is uniquely positioned as a place where he can leave a positive lasting mark on privacy.
Conor HealyJessalin LamJessalin Lam is a learning and development leader, DEI champion, and mentor with over 10 years of combined experience across L&D, DEI, marketing, partnerships, business development, and consulting. Jessalin is a lifelong learner and connector who loves to cultivate learning cultures and empower people to thrive and seize their potential with a growth mindset.
Jessalin joined IAB from TBWA\Worldwide, where she was the Precision Marketing Academy Director for the Nissan account leading a global employee training program across the agency and client. Prior to that, she worked at the American Association of Advertising Agencies (4A’s), where she consulted with agency HR partners and leaders to help them develop their talent from entry-level to executive level across various trainings.
In 2021, Jessalin was elected to the Association for Talent Development NYC Board of Directors. She is also the Co-Founder of Asians in Advertising, a community focused on creating opportunities for Asians and elevating them to higher leadership positions.
Rachel McEnerneyOver the course of her 15 year career, Rachel has had the honor of working at some of the most respected companies in the industry. Getting her start at Edelman PR, she focused primarily on forging and executing media and content partnerships with broadcast and digital properties on behalf of clients. Her subsequent roles supporting cable ad sales at NBCUniversal and the CNÉ sales team at Condé Nast fully immersed her in the world of digital media and sales marketing and set her up for success when she joined Vevo to lead their Ad Sales Marketing team. During her five years with the music video platform, Rachel was a respected leader within the sales organization and focused her efforts on innovating strategic solutions for client partners and crafting complex go-to-market products and narratives in support of Vevo’s global salesforce.
Michael TexidorBrendan ThomasBrendan is IAB’s Vice President of Policy Communications, helping to create greater awareness among policy makers and the press of digital advertising’s importance to technological and economic progress, creativity, and the ad-supported internet.
He works closely with IAB’s legal and public policy experts, as well as more than 700 IAB members, to enhance public understanding of digital marketing and advertising’s value to small businesses and their customers, and the industry’s innovations to online commerce, personal data protection and privacy, and more.
Prior to joining IAB, Brendan directed policy communications for members of Congress and for a major trade association. A graduate of Northwestern University, he received his Master’s Degree from University of Southern California and worked as a reporter and producer in the news and entertainment industries in New York and Los Angeles.
Benjamin DickBen is Director, Data & Ad Effectiveness within IAB’s Data Center of Excellence. He leads IAB projects within its automation, identity, measurement/attribution groups, and works with leading ad technologists, agencies and publishers to identify and navigate some of the most pressing opportunities and challenges within these verticals. By developing best practices, research, white papers, and thought leadership in collaboration with IAB members, Ben helps improve and facilitate digital media buying and selling via automated tools, software and data.
Prior to joining the IAB, Ben was Associate Director, Digital Trading at GroupM where he oversaw programmatic strategy, measurement / optimization, ad operations, and private marketplace relationships across Nestlé 85 brand US portfolio. In this capacity he was responsible for building and “productizing” the Nestlé Trade Desk (NTD), an independent programmatic buying unit developed specifically to service Nestle brands. Prior to his work on Nestlé, Ben held positions at both Maxus Global and Universal McCann where he helped lead the development of programmatic and measurement/attribution strategies for large global brands including MasterCard, Barclays, Harvard Business School, and Welch’s.
Ben received a B.S. in Communications and Entrepreneurship from the S.I. Newhouse School of Public Communications at Syracuse University and resides in Brooklyn, NY.
John GriffertyErick HarrisErick currently serves as Legislative Director and Senior Counsel to Congressman Steve Chabot (OH). In addition to handling the judiciary portfolio, Erick focuses on financial services, tax, labor, and technology issues. Erick formerly served as Legislative Counsel to Congresswoman Emerson (MO) and as an aide to Senator Jim Talent (MO) and at the U.S. Department of Justice in the Office of the Solicitor General.
While completing his law degree, Erick served on the Wiley Rutledge Moot Court Board and as Senior Editor of the Washington University Jurisprudence Review. He appeared on various media outlets to discuss the 2008 Presidential election.
Erick received his Juris Doctor from Washington University in St. Louis, School of Law and his Bachelor of Science Degree from Vanderbilt University in Political Science and Human and Organizational Development with a concentration on Public Policy. While studying at Vanderbilt, Erick served on the Honor Council and completed internships with the U.S. House of Representatives, the U.S. Senate, the British House of Commons, and at the White House.
Erick is originally from Cape Girardeau, Missouri and he and his wife, Bridgette currently reside in Washington D.C with their miniature goldendoodle, Vandy.
Nicole HorsfordNicole joins the IAB as Senior Manager in the Member Services department. In this role she strategically engages and recruits IAB membership through the creation of our many offerings and events. Nicole draws from her wealth of industry experience both on the buy side, having worked for Saatchi and Saatchi, and on the sell side at Oddcast and Westwood One. Her natural curiosity and desire to learn the industry also landed her experience client side, working as a Marketing Manager for Emblem Health. Nicole graduated from Fordham University with a BA in Communications & Media Studies, as well as a business degree. Her latest curiosity is travel, and when not working she tries to discover as many new places as possible.
Deleela JonesDeleela Jones was most recently head of B2B marketing at Live Nation Entertainment where she was responsible for building Live Nation’s value proposition to advertisers and promoting the brand’s thought-leadership.
Prior to joining Live Nation, Deleela was Senior Director of Industry & Agency Marketing at Pandora Media where she led strategy, planning and execution of Pandora’s high impact industry events and agency programs.
Throughout her professional career, Deleela has held marketing leadership positions at some of the biggest media brands in the world, including USA TODAY/Gannett, Yahoo! and Univision Communications. She is known for helping to drive revenue for high-performing sales organizations and the ability to forge strategic partnerships.
Deleela earned an M.B.A. in marketing from Baruch College in NYC and a Bachelor of Arts with Distinction in telecommunications from Penn State University.
Kathleen McKayKathleen has been the Event Director at IAB since 2018. In this role, she and the events team are responsible for all the behind-the-scenes magic that bring an event to life. Prior to joining IAB, Kathleen worked for over 10 years in the meeting and events industry. Most recently as the Senior Manager, Special Event for the David Lynch Foundation and the Event Director at IQPC, a leading conference company.
In her spare time, she loves to travel, explore the NYC/Hoboken restaurant scene, go on brewery tours, binge watch Law & Order, and spend time with her boyfriend and nieces.
Kathleen received her Bachelors of Science from James Madison University and currently resides in Hoboken, NJ.
Mayank MishraMayank is a visionary technologist, bringing several years of thoughtful leadership in all stages of technology design, development, execution in support of a product vision and road-map with experience from large corporations to early startups adept in conceiving, defining, developing, & launching Web & mobile applications.
He has designed system software, Middleware, eCommerce and Mobile platform/apps for Fortune 50 corporations to startups for companies like IBM, Appssavvy,Kickapps and Flurry.
With certifications like PMI, Java/J2EE, Business Rules and also being speaker at developer conferences, he loves learning new technology and designing platforms.
With several mobile apps in app store and SDK’s running on thousand of devices, he loves to spend time in building mobile and wearable apps or playing guitar.
Nicole PellegrinoNicole Pellegrino joins the IAB most recently from Outbrain where she worked with leading publishers to monetize and diversify revenue streams. Prior to Outbrain, Nicole held various roles at InStyle, Conde Nast, VEVO and Specific Media/VIANT where she focused her time collaborating with brands to create multi-platform solutions and branded content programs. With a foundation in strategic planning/buying, Nicole is passionate about media and the world of interactive marketing.
Outside of the office you can find Nicole spending time with her husband and beautiful daughter, cooking a delicious Italian meal or enjoying an 80s Peloton ride.
Joe PillaJoe Pilla joined IAB in Summer of 2018 as Director, Data & Automation within the IAB Programmatic+Data Center. In his role, Joe works closely with Orchid Richardson, VP, Managing Director on a variety of projects related to data transparency, attribution modeling and the changing consumer experience.
Joe brings a wealth of diverse media experience to IAB from his accomplished career in advertising research and consumer insights. Previously, Joe was Vice President, Social Insights at Zenith Media where he led the Social Intelligence practice providing clients with data analysis related to their brand environment, online conversation and campaign performance. Joe spearheaded several agency thought leadership initiatives covering a wide spectrum of topics including brand integrations, the rise of Influencer Marketing, shifts in consumer behavior, and the relationship between televised tent pole events and Social Media channels.
Prior to Zenith, Joe was the Associate Director of Media & Consumer Insights at Mindshare where he led the adoption of The Loop, the agency’s global operating system linking real-time multimedia insights to real-time actions. Naturally curious, Joe excelled at developing the annual US Consumer Trends presenting the agency perspective to clients nationwide. Before making a move to the agency world, Joe honed his storytelling expertise at Condè Nast, Meredith Corporation and Reader’s Digest where he mastered syndicated research bringing the magazine consumer to life.
Joe earned a Bachelor’s of Science in Marketing from Rutgers University. He lives in Long Island City with his husband Kevin Davis, AIA. Joe sits on the board of SuperCommunityLIC, a local organization celebrating the local community while finding ways to give back. In his spare time, Joe produces his YouTube Channel “Pop Culture Monger” dedicated to the latest entertainment news with the tagline nonsense to follow.
Soizic SacrezJill WittkoppJill Wittkopp is Senior Director of Management at the IAB Tech Lab, a global consortium for technical standards in the digital advertising industry. Prior to joining the IAB Tech Lab, Jill worked on the buy side of programmatic advertising with companies like MyBuys, Magnetic and Rakuten. She has a B.A. in English from the University of Michigan, Dearborn and lives in San Francisco, California.
Jarrett WoldJarrett Wold comes to the IAB Tech Lab with a diverse background in technology leading teams focused on digital applications. His most recent role was Director of Technology and Platforms at Ad-ID, where he was overseeing Ad-ID’s technology endeavors and focusing on industry standards for the advertising ecosystem. His former role as Director of Technology includes Ad-ID, Rodale, Inc. and HealthiNation. He also worked at AOL on AOL Video, AOL Search, and Moviefone. He graduated from Syracuse University and is a huge Orange fan!Luz BritoCameron BurnhamCameron is a pioneer of the digital media industry having worked at iconic industry brands like Yahoo!, News Corp, and Twitter.
For the last 20 years, his career has spanned across sales, strategic partnerships, business development, and sales management roles with a consultative approach that’s delivered trusted and value-driven partnerships.
His industry experience runs across Digital Display, Video/OTT, Social, DOOH, Programmatic, and SaaS. Most recently, Cameron has focused his work around deterministic, people-based, activation’s and omni-channel attribution initiatives with the purpose of providing incremental revenue and scaling wanted business impact.
A passionate industry professional and relationship builder who is committed to exceeding goals and expectations for partners, his team and company.
Rowena LamRowena brings years of experience in product development of ad-supported casual games on mobile and web. Most recently, she led product at Jump Ramp Games where she was responsible for the strategic direction and vision of the consumer-facing mobile apps. This included the development and launch of several games, supporting internal tools, and ad monetization services. In addition to product leadership, Rowena also has a background in digital marketing. In her spare time, Rowena enjoys trying out new recipes and traveling.
Mina PajevicMatt ShapoMatt Shapo is a product development and digital strategy leader who brings more than 20 years of experience overseeing the creation and multi-platform delivery of online content and internet advertising to his role as the Director of Digital Audio and Video at the IAB.
Before IAB, Matt served as VP of Digital Content for the All Access Music Group, a music marketing company and audio industry news publisher where he planned and led advertising, editorial, and other growth initiatives for AllAccess.com, a B2B website that delivers breaking news, data, and commentary to an audience of professional audio content creators, salespeople, and decisionmakers.
Over the course of his career, Matt has directed and measured the effectiveness of integrated advertising and email marketing campaigns for multiple leading record labels and radio companies. He has also led the ideation, development, launch, and continuous iteration of profitable digital media products, including an industry leading digital audio distribution platform that delivers new music and related content to a nationwide user base of radio stations, streaming services, tv networks, podcasters, and others.
Matt holds a B.A. in Political Science and International Relations from Tufts University and an M.F.A. in Radio, TV, and Film Production from Florida State University, and he is a devoted fan of his hometown Miami Dolphins. He lives with his wife, Jennifer, and their wonderful son Evan, in Randolph, NJ where he is an enthusiastic hiker and a proud member of the Randolph High School Marching Rams parents’ road crew.
Colleen ShieldsColleen Shields joined the IAB in 2012, and supports the IAB Tech Lab in advancing the team’s work of producing protocols and tools that help companies implement global industry technical standards. Colleen is a native Wisconsinite, though she has lived in London and Sydney previously. In her spare time she enjoys attending storytelling and comedy events around New York, pointing out that all things great in the world stem from Wisconsin, hiding her North-woods accent, and working on silversmithing in her basement.
Brooke StevensElizabeth AcayanAs a CMS (content management system) admin and project coordinator, Elizabeth is involved with content, page creation, and maintenance of the website. She plans, customizes and integrates third party softwares and applications with the website for the best possible user experience.
Brian AlbertBrian Albert leads the US Google/YouTube media partnerships team, driving strategic display & video deals with our largest advertising clients and agency partners. He also is responsible for all Google Preferred & other YouTube premium video upfront negotiations. Before this, Brian led a team which enabled independent media & creative agencies to unlock value across Google's media properties & technology platforms.
Prior to Google, Brian spent 15+ years as a labor & employment attorney, sports marketer representing professional athletes, Internet entrepreneur at 3 early stage start-ups and digital marketing agency executive.
He served on the Ad Council's inaugural Social Impact Council in 2016 and currently supports YouTube’s involvement with the IAB Digital Content NewFronts. A graduate of The University of Michigan and The George Washington University Law School, Brian resides just outside Boston, MA with his wife and son.
LaToya AndersonI have 20 years experience in accounting and administration. Before joining IAB, I started my career as a Client Associate at Chase Manhattan Bank in Global Trading. I then moved on from Chase and started working at Bank of New York as a Financial Analyst in Investment Management. I decided I wanted to try a little something different and started working at Long Island University as a Executive Assistant. I enjoyed it and it definitely was too easy so I went back to accounting. I started working at Major Food Group (Carbone, Sadelles, The Grill, and Lobster Club to name a few) a very well known Hospitality Group as a Staff Accountant.
I love traveling with my two amazing daughters Tatiana and Tiana along with my significant other. I enjoy watching Football and I am a huge fan of the Philadelphia Eagles. When I visit my country Belize I volunteer at the Orphanage Child Care Program.
I am a alumni of Berkeley College where I received my degree in Accounting. I am a member of the National Black Accountants Association.
Renie AndersonRenie Anderson was named Chief Revenue Officer and Executive Vice President, NFL Partnerships in March of 2019. In this role, Anderson oversees the League’s partnership divisions, including sponsorship, new business, consumer products, and media sales.
Anderson manages a team that creates new partnerships in open categories and maintains the relationships and activation of the NFL’s current corporate sponsors and licensees, including blue-chip companies such as Pepsi, Microsoft, P&G, Verizon, Bose, Nike, New Era, EA, and many more. In addition to partnerships, Anderson is also responsible for all media sales for the League’s owned and operated media assets, including NFL Network and NFL Digital Media.
Anderson, who joined the National Football League in 2006 after nine seasons at the Arena Football League, has garnered numerous awards and accolades. She is a Hall of Fame honoree of the Sports Business Journal’s prestigious Forty Under 40 award; an Ad Age 40 Under 40 winner; a 2016 WISE Woman of the Year; a Sports Business Journal “Game Changer”; and was named one of “The Most Powerful Women in Sports” by Adweek.
Anderson graduated from the University of Mississippi in 1997 with a degree in Journalism and resides in Darien, Conn., with her husband Chris McCloskey and daughters Callie and Kate.
Kyle AntoianKyle Antoian is the Vice President, Strategic Partnerships at Epsilon, responsible for identifying and integrating new partnership opportunities into the company’s product line. Antoian helps lead the strategic partnerships group at Epsilon and focuses on data commercialization, new product incubation, and partnerships.
Kyle joined Epsilon from Datran Media where he led strategic partnership expansion with a focus on growing the user base of publishers and sustaining and prospecting match partners. Prior to that he was Marketing Manager at Takkle Inc, tasked with new customer acquisition and analytics.
Kyle holds a bachelor’s degree in Economics from Duke University. He is the assistant coach of Philadelphia-Whitemarsh Rugby Football Club and sits on the board of the Eastern Pennsylvania Rugby Union.
Yoav ArnsteinYoav Arnstein is the Director of Product Marketing for Publisher Solutions in Facebook’s London office. Yoav joined Facebook from LiveRail. Previously, he was at Legolas Media where he was CEO and grew the company to a multi-million dollar revenue business. Prior to Legolas, Yoav was at Eyeblaster (now MediaMind) where he was GM International, and then GM North American operations. At Eyeblaster, Yoav oversaw revenue growth of more than 5x, opened multiple international offices and helped build Eyeblaster into the world’s leading rich media ad platform. Yoav holds a B.Sc in Computer Science and Statistics from Tel-Aviv University and an M.Sc. in Computer Engineering from Denmark’s Technical University.
Craig AtkinsonAs Chief Digital and Operating Officer at PHD USA, Craig maintains a dual role with oversight of the agency overall as well as serving as the champion of thought leadership and innovation focused on the agency’s output.
Craig came to PHD after 6+ years at sister agencies OMD and Omnicom Media Group where, most recently he served as Chief of Acquisitions, North America, leading strategic and corporate development for Omnicom Media Group, with a particular focus on emerging areas of digital channels including search marketing, mobile, social media and content development. In addition, Craig was the overall owner of the client relationship for the McDonald’s US business at OMD.
Before taking on the Acquisitions role, Craig served as Midwest Regional Director at OMD and was responsible for the strategic direction and regional oversight of OMD’s Chicago operations.
Craig has held positions within digital marketing since its inception in the mid 1990’s, playing key Account, Media and Strategy roles at Modem Media, Digitas, and Arc Worldwide leading digital marketing strategy and program development for such clients as Intel, Michelin, HP, the U.S. Army and Allstate. Craig also spent two years on the client side working inside Washington Mutual’s ecommerce group as a product manager, leading development of applications to acquire and securitize mortgage backed loans.
A frequent speaker and recognized thought leader in the emerging and digital marketing landscape, Craig is regularly quoted in such publications as The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, Advertising Age and Adweek.
Craig is a graduate of the University of Vermont, recently relocated to the NY area and is thoroughly enjoying eating his way through his new neighborhood in Brooklyn with his wife Nikki and sons Jake and Sam.
Matthew AzarkMatt has worked in digital media for over 12 years with stops at companies like[email protected], CBS Interactive, and Undertone. He currently lives in Park Slope, Brooklyn with his wife (who is also in the industry) and 4-year-old son.
Sheri BachsteinSheri Bachstein leads the consumer division for The Weather Company, an IBM Business (Weather). This includes overseeing all aspects of The Weather Channel and Weather Underground consumer properties, including product management and design, content development and global expansion across the organization on Weather’s owned and operated properties.
Sheri has played a role on many different aspects of The Weather Channel digital properties since joining in 2007. Previously she was head of global audience growth and has also led international consumer product for weather.com and The Weather Channel apps. While leading web efforts, she moved weather.com to a fully responsive site, improved SEO efforts, optimized referral traffic, and oversaw engagement and lifestyle sponsorship efforts. As vice president of product operations, Sheri’s overseen monetization, operations and the agile team. She’s also worked as a leader for audience products, as well as in product management for weather.com and global products.
But this isn’t her first stint at The Weather Channel. She worked previously for the television network as a producer and as part of the “storm tracking” team that went into the field to cover storms (1997-2000). Before returning to Weather, Sheri served as vice president of product and content at RMS Networks in Fort Lauderdale, FL. In her career she has also worked as a producer for WGNX-TV, Atlanta’s CBS affiliate.
Sheri is a member of Women in Cable Telecommunications (WICT) and has won multiple media awards, including an Emmy Award for breaking news coverage of the Atlanta Centennial Park bombing and an Associated Press Award for sports reporting.
An Atlanta native, Sheri received her bachelor’s degree in journalism from Georgia State University. She enjoys playing golf, traveling and cooking.
Rafeh BaigLalit BalchandaniPaul BannisterPaul is the Chief Strategy Officer at CafeMedia, the world’s largest ad management service, providing the technology and services that help the highest quality publishers grow their businesses and maximize success. The company serves over 3,000 independent publishers whose distinctive voices are shaping the open web. The company’s collective of creators reaches more than 160 million monthly unique visitors, ranking as the 11th largest digital entity and as #1 in Food, Family, and Home.Paul focuses on new product innovation, strategic partnerships, and corporate development at CafeMedia. During his time at CafeMedia, he led the company’s transition to a programmatic-first approach, spearheaded the early adoption of header bidding, and directed the transition to a publisher services model. Paul has worked in digital media and advertising since the mid-90s, starting a major video game publisher out of his parent’s basement. He worked for early internet pioneers including USWeb/CKS and CMP Media.
Airey BaringerAirey Baringer is Head of Product at Quantcast. At Quantcast, Airey is focused on developing product and business solutions at the intersection of privacy and advertising.
Previously, Airey led business and product development teams for consumer internet and SaaS products, including products focused on helping consumers complete their taxes, understand and act in accordance with the Affordable Care Act, and increase access to sustainable food products. In his free time, Airey is usually trail running, backpacking, cycling, and eating his way through the San Francisco Bay Area.
Lea BarthelemyLea brings diverse experiences ranging from B2B and B2C marketing, amongst other various industries. She is beyond excited to be joining the IAB marketing team!Christina BeaumierChristina Beaumier can get by in a few languages. She can order street food in Spanish and handle tribal negotiations in Burkina Faso in French. She understands the artist’s argot of her Northampton, MA hometown; comprehends the brainier dialects that originate at MIT, her alma mater; and is attuned to the intricacies of the Brooklyn accent, where she now lives with her family.
After a Peace Corps stint in Burkina Faso, and business school at MIT Sloan, Christina started her post-MBA career in investment banking, learning an analytical linguistics based on rigor and numbers. She was then exposed to the more creative syntax of the marketing world.
This path led her to Xaxis where she had a meteoric rise, starting as Director Strategic Engagements, then VP Global Client Development, then VP Media Product Development, and ultimately becoming SVP and leader of their digital ad unit. She was most recently a Strategic Partner Lead, Video Distributors and Telco, at Google, further solidifying her position as the Most Interesting Women in Ad Tech.
Her combined studies across continents and industries have made her into one of the most fluent translators in ad tech:Within ad tech, nothing is a silo! There’s always a business development angle, a client angle, a technology angle, a media angle, a product angle… so being able to speak different languages and relate to different stakeholders is a powerful tool to help bridge gaps and bring people together.
Christina now brings her encyclopedic experience and comprehensive understanding of the industry to her role as VP, Product, TV Platform for AT&T’s advertising and analytics company Xandr. She considers this to be the perfect place to bring everything together: the rigor of analytics and the stories of brands, finally translated into a message that people care to hear.
The future at AT&T is exciting and not without uncertainty, but Christina finds herself comfortable in imbalance. She believes that the essence of business and life is a commitment to always correcting those imbalances, and finding the best way forward.
Advertising needs to relearn how to communicate with humans; Christina is the polyglot for the job.
Tom BedecarréTom Bedecarré is one of the most influential leaders in advertising today. Recently named “Silicon Valley’s Favorite Adman” by Fortune Magazine, he was described as a rare hybrid who has cred with both Silicon Valley techies and advertising’s Mad Men.
Tom is CEO of AKQA, the world’s largest independent digital advertising agency. With 1,000 global employees, AKQA has offices in Amsterdam, Berlin, London, New York, San Francisco, Shanghai and Washington D.C. and serves leading clients including Audi, Heineken, Nike, Target, Visa and Xbox.
An enthusiastic entrepreneur, Tom has been an innovator and pioneer of the advertising and communications business over the last three decades. Previously, Tom was founder and CEO of Citron Haligman Bedecarré, San Francisco’s largest independent advertising agency and a leader in launching Internet brands.
Tom holds a BA degree from Stanford University and an MBA degree from the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University.
Jeff BenjaminJeff Benjamin, former Partner and Chief Creative Officer at Crispin Porter + Bogusky, joined JWT in 2012 as Chief Creative Officer, North America.
During his career, Jeff has navigated clients through the interactive landscape with great success, creating some of the world’s most pioneering and famous campaigns. His ability to lead multi-national marketers to experiment and break ground has continually opened up new doors for brands such as Best Buy, Coke Zero, Domino’s Pizza, Microsoft and Kraft. ‘Subservient Chicken’ and ‘Whopper Sacrifice,’ his campaigns for Burger King, are among the most successful viral marketing campaigns of all time.
Jeff has been recognized internationally by every major industry award show, winning the Grand Prix at Cannes in three different categories, Best of Show at the One Show, and the Grand Clio at the Clio Awards. He served as president of the Cyber Jury at Cannes in 2010, has been profiled in Fast Company and The New York Times, appeared in the ‘Creativity 50’ and is regularly called upon by television networks such as CNBC to comment on the state of the industry. His work has been showcased in numerous publications, including The Wall Street Journal, Communication Arts, Time, and Newsweek.
Varun BhagwanVarun Bhagwan is an executive with 20 years of experience leading numerous R&D projects from inception to delivery. Varun currently serves as Vice President of Product Management & Engineering at Verizon Media, where he is responsible for all Advertising Data Products: Targeting & Identity, Insights & Measurement, and Trust & Verification. Prior to the formation of Verizon Media, Varun held several leadership roles at Yahoo! focused on Data, Insights & Measurement as well as Mail Monetization Insights & Analytics.
Prior to joining Yahoo!, Varun worked in research for 12 years at IBM where his focus areas included text analytics, web-scale systems, information Integration, healthcare, and privacy.
Varun holds his Bachelor of Engineering in Electronics and Telecommunications Engineering from Maulana Azad National Institute of Technology, and his MS in Computer Science from University of Florida. Varun has invented or co-invented roughly 50 patents, is a Yahoo! Master Inventor, holds 10 honors & awards including Verizon’s top honor of the Verizon Credo Award, and produced more than 15 publications in top tier conferences and journals. Varun is also a frequent speaker at industry events and represents the company at events such as CES, Cannes Lions etc.
Sahiba BhatnagarSahiba Bhatnagar has a background in the nonprofit world, with experience at the David Lynch Foundation and UNICEF. While working for these companies, she gathered experience in administration, development, and events. Working galas and fundraisers for both these companies made her fall in love with putting together events.
Paige BilinsPaige Bilins leads Telaria’s global product team and is responsible for developing the company’s product strategy and designing and bringing to market proprietary yield and inventory management software solutions for premium video publishers across all screens and transaction types.
Prior to joining Telaria, Paige was SVP, Product Management at Freewheel where she spent over eight years. In that role, she led product strategy across two businesses resulting in double digit year-over-year growth. Ms. Bilins started her career at as a software engineer in the defense industry at Lockheed Martin and Northrop Grumman.
Paige holds a B.S. in Computer Science from Arizona State University as well as an MBA from Yale University.
Winston BinchWinston Binch is Chief Digital Officer, Deutsch North America, and one of the most accomplished digital marketing leaders and innovators of his generation. Over the past 15 years, he’s developed some of the industry’s most influential and meaningful digital campaigns, products, and experiences, bringing customization to Nike by way of Nike iD and the Pizza Tracker to Domino’s, Whopper Sacrifice to Burger King, and reinventing Volkswagen’s approach to online car shopping. He has also advised countless global brands and conglomerates on how to identify the marketing potential of the digital age, including American Express, Best Buy, Microsoft, Target, Pizza Hut, Vail Resorts, Sprint and Taco Bell. An educator and humanitarian at heart, Winston is co-founder of Boulder Digital Works at the University of Colorado, a digital continuing education program, and sits on the board of Protect Our Winters, a non-profit organization against climate change. See what he’s up to on Twitter or Instagram @winstonbinch.
Lincoln BjorkmanMarcela BonancioMarcela is an Executive Assistant that has been working with C- level in the marketing/ media/ advertising industry for over 10 years.
Renee BourneRenee Bourne is a dynamic and resourceful professional, with an exceptional background working in the ever changing, fast-paced events industry. Prior to joining IAB, Renee has worked at Dow Jones and Black Enterprise as their Sponsorship Manager. She comes with a plethora of experience handling best in class brand management for assigned accounts that brings cross platform media campaigns & national event partnerships to life.
In her spare time Renee likes to travel with her two daughters and manage her online children’s boutique.
Renee received her Associates Degree from Long Island University C.W. Post and a Bachelor of Science from SUNY Empire College.
Dan BrackettDan is the CTO of Extreme Reach. He leads innovation and development with a customer-centric revision cycle, growing our industry-leading platform with new capabilities every two weeks. With over 15 years of experience in systems architecture, application design and development of leadership, Dan is known for developing transformative advertising technology solutions.
Conor BradyConor Brady is a Global Creative Director at Huge, where he works closely with creative teams across the agency’s offices in the United States, Europe and Latin America. Conor plays a critical role in Huge’s work on integrated marketing campaigns and business development.
Before joining Huge, Conor served as Chief Creative Officer at Organic, where he was responsible for overseeing the creative discipline across all offices in the United States and Europe. He has worked with many of the world’s largest brands, including Pepsi, Intel, Hilton Hotel Group, VW, BBC, Bank of America, P&G, Nike and Conde Nast.
Conor studied at the Royal College of Art and Middlesex University and holds a BA in graphic design. Conor is an avid cyclist and lives in Brooklyn with his wife. In his spare time, he runs Elcyclista, a journal for bike design and culture.
Brad BrinegarBrad has led Durham, North Carolina-based McKinney since 2002.
Since his arrival, McKinney has more than doubled in size by building one of the most innovative business models in the advertising industry, one that blurs the line between traditional and digital media. As a result, McKinney has been recognized as one of the best agencies in the country by Advertising Age. In 2008, Brad led a management buyback of the agency from French holding company Havas.
He is also on the board of the American Association of Advertising Agencies (4A’s) and founding chair of the Interactive Advertising Bureau’s (IAB’s) Agency Advisory Board.
An anthropology major at Dartmouth, where he rowed on the varsity crew and was editor-in-chief of the humor magazine, Brad also earned a finance MBA from Columbia. Before joining McKinney, he spent two decades at global advertising giant Leo Burnett in Chicago, rising from trainee to CEO of Leo Burnett USA.
Philippe BrowningDave CampanelliDavid Campanelli is a 19 year industry veteran and a homegrown Horizon talent. As Executive Vice President, Director of Video Investment, David is in charge of all Horizon’s national TV and premium digital video buying. David oversees such accounts as GEICO, Dish, Weight Watchers Burger King, Corona, LG, Little Caesars, Capital One and others. Over the past several years Horizon has seen its billings in the National arena skyrocket to now exceed $4.3B under David’s supervision.
David has spearheaded Horizon’s “video buying” approach, helping to break down the walls between traditional TV buying and digital video buying, resulting in innovative deals on behalf of his clients. Also, he has established and oversees Horizon’s sports buying unit, which has become one of the largest sports spenders in the industry, have placed major sports platforms such as the Capital One Orange Bowl.
More recently David has set his sights on the advanced TV marketplace, creating Horizon Advanced, a dedicated team to lead Horizon’s path forward in the emerging world of data informed, programmatic and Over The Top TV.
David has already garnered some of the industry’s top honors, including winning a CableFax “Sweet 16” award and the Mediaweek All-Star Award in the National TV category.
Andrew CasaleAs President and CEO of Index Exchange, Andrew leads 300 of the brightest minds in advertising technology across the U.S., Canada and Europe. With a sharp focus on delivering benefits to media companies like The New York Times, Hearst, Daily Mail and Conde Nast as they tackle the world of automation, he’s built Index Exchange as one of the only pure-play and transparent ad exchanges in the advertising ecosystem. While he’s responsible for providing strategic direction and market vision to the company at large, he’s also hands on with all day-to-day corporate operations.
Andrew has a unique penchant for the advertising industry and the promise of its automated future. At only age 15, he was a strategic advisor for his family company, Casale Media – one of the first ad tech startups built to help marketers manage online ad inventory. 15 years later, he’s pivoted his family’s company Casale Media into Index Exchange. By doubling down on investments in engineering and infrastructure, he’s continued to grow the company’s revenue by over 100% y/y and adding headcount when needed to bolster the company’s offering.
As a respected industry thought leader, Andrew is widely sought-after for his expertise and opinions on programmatic and exchange-traded media, and the growing need to transact with transparency at the forefront of the conversation. Andrew’s bylines and media contributions have appeared in numerous publications including Ad Age, Adweek, AdExchanger, The New York Times and The Wall Street Journal.
Karen CaulfieldKaren leads Acxiom’s data product division with responsibility for data product strategy and the expansion of Acxiom’s data capabilities in the US and across global markets. Karen’s expertise lies in the design, development, and implementation of customer targeting and engagement strategies. Karen has deep experience across all aspects of the data ecosystem and is an expert on the nuances and complexities of the global data landscape with significant on-the-ground experience across EMEA, Latin America, Asia Pacific, and North America.
Before joining Acxiom Karen was Vice President of Global Data Solutions at Merkle where she focused on expanding Merkle’s data solutions into new global markets as well as working with clients to expand their CRM strategies across geographies. Prior to that, she held multiple roles in Europe and the Americas with ICLP – the global loyalty agencyJoe CepollinaJoe has 25 years of experience in both digital and physical product development leadership. He currently leads content and search advertising, as well as homepage experiences, for Microsoft News. His teams have driven a host of novel technical and product innovations in the area of native advertising, including implementation of new server-side delivery mechanisms that improve user experience, fraud rates, breakage, and yield. Joe’s passion with respect to advertising is ensuring that digital advertising is used as a force for good, allowing consumers access to trusted and valuable experiences that they would not otherwise be able to afford, or be willing to pay for. His current professional focus areas include developing industry-wide solutions that allow users to safely and proactively share information with publishers and advertisers, as well as innovating on business models in ways that help content publishers achieve sustainable economics.
Tal ChalozinTal Chalozin is Co-Founder & CTO of Innovid, the industry leader in interactive video advertising. As CTO of Innovid, Mr. Chalozin is responsible for technology development and implementation, product creation and business development activities across the company.
Mr. Chalozin is a multi-disciplinary entrepreneur, in early 2006 he co-founded the GarageGeeks (www.garageGeeks.org), a non for profit organization for creative people to meet, innovate and build noncommercial projects that would otherwise not come to life. GarageGeeks has grown to be one of Israel’s biggest “underground” organizations and its community consists of more than 1,000 active members. Prior to the GarageGeeks, Chalozin served as an officer in an elite computer unit in the Israeli Air Force for eight years, where he led the development of several military products with high algorithmic complexity.
Peter ChelalaPete Chelala is Viacom’s Vice President of Mobile and Video Partner Solutions where he focuses on driving strategy and development of mobile and video ad sales products across Viacom Media Networks’ Music, Entertainment, Kids and Family brands. He joined Viacom from The Weather Channel where he worked for the four years building and selling marketing solutions across the its mobile platform. Prior to The Weather Channel, Mr. Chelala spent three years in the online ad sales at both About.com and Yahoo!. Before moving into ad sales, he worked in production on commercials, music videos and feature films out of Los Angeles.
Debi ChirichellaDebi Chirichella is president of Hearst Magazines, one of the world’s largest publishers of monthly magazines, with 25 U.S. titles and close to 300 international editions, after serving as executive vice president, chief financial officer and director of global operations for Hearst Magazines.
She joined Hearst Magazines as senior vice president and chief financial officer in November 2011, overseeing the company’s strategic financial planning and reporting. Previously, Chirichella spent seven years at Condé Nast, where she served in a number of executive positions. From 2008 until early 2011, she was chief operating officer of Condé Nast Digital; simultaneously, beginning in 2010, she was COO of the Fairchild Fashion Group. Before that, she was chief financial officer of Condé Nast Publications.
Earlier in her career, Chirichella held several high-level planning, finance and operations roles at Primedia, and most recently, she served as CFO/COO at Prometheus Global Media.
Chirichella is a graduate of Princeton University and received her master’s degree in business from Harvard University. She currently resides in Mountain Lakes, New Jersey, with her husband and three children.
Brent ChoiVery few have had a run like Brent Choi over the past decade. Prior to being tapped to lead both J. Walter Thompson New York and Canada in 2015, Brent helped to transform the company’s Canadian operation, winning new business and leading the agency to be named Strategy’s 2015 Silver Agency of the Year. In fact, since 2000, Brent has helped two different agencies to become Agency of the Year in Canada.
Now, Brent drives industry-leading creative work for clients like Johnson & Johnson, Puma, Kellogg’s Special K, Tim Hortons, Air Canada, and more.
In 2013, Brent was the #2 ranked Chief Creative Officer in the world for his digital work, and consistently ranked as one of Canada’s top 10 creative directors. In the past few years, he has received several Cannes Lions (including two golds), multiple CLIOs and D&AD pencils, AdAge’s Top Five Ads of the Year, and was one of only 11 worldwide winners of the inaugural Fast Company Innovation Award. His work has also been featured numerous times in Mashable, Wired, Forbes, CNN, and Fast Company.
Some would say his creative success is because he started with a business degree from Ivey, one of Canada’s top business schools. Others will argue it’s in spite of it. At home he is a proud dad, insane NFL fan, and loving husband. His wife would add “In that order.”Halle ClemensPrior to joining Tech Lab, Halle worked as a production assistant on commercials for companies such Apple, Nike, Tostitos. During the pandemic, she was a volunteer teacher’s assistant at a refugee center, working with refugees from North Africa, the Middle East, and Central Asia.
Travis ClingerAs Senior Vice President of Addressability and Ecosystem at LiveRamp, Travis is responsible for leading the company’s global digital advertising ecosystem strategy: leading strategic initiatives, advancing global partnerships, and overseeing the business development and go-to-market strategies for key addressability products and initiatives. The Authenticated Traffic Solution is one such product, enabling publishers to link their first party identity to IdentityLink and then connect to the IdentityLink infrastructure LiveRamp has built across partner platforms to enable marketers to buy and measure on IdentityLink. Travis is a co-founder and Board Member of the Advertising ID Consortium, advocating for people-based identifiers to be transacted across the open Internet. Prior to joining LiveRamp, Travis was a director at Epic Systems responsible for implementing systems that managed sensitive healthcare information. Travis holds a BA in Political Science from Rollins College.
Paul holds a BSE, EECS from Princeton University, an MS in Computer Science from John Hopkins University and an MBA from the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania.
Dennis ColonChristine CookChristine Cook is senior vice president and chief revenue officer of CNN Digital, WarnerMedia Ad Sales. In this leadership position, Cook oversees sales strategy for CNN’s overall digital portfolio, which includes premium verticals, mobile products, programmatic, and emerging businesses. Based in New York, Cook reports to Joe Hogan, executive vice president of sales and marketing for WarnerMedia.
Cook plays a critical role in creating a holistic sales approach across CNN’s digital business, while strengthening digital revenue opportunities in line with the company’s go-to-market strategies. With a special focus on video, social and rich branded content campaigns, Cook also partners closely with the Content Partnerships team and Courageous brand studio to bring to life the KPIs of ad partners across CNN’s digital footprint.
Prior to joining WarnerMedia, Cook served as senior vice president and global head of advertising partnerships at Flipboard. During her six years at the company, Cook oversaw the global sales force and mobile-led revenue strategy. As an advisor, and then founding member of the advertising business team, she built the partnerships unit from the ground up, which was responsible for publisher partnerships, advertising sales, operations and creative brand marketing strategy. Prior to joining Flipboard in 2012, Cook held leadership roles at The Daily, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, IAC/InterActiveCorp, Financial Times, and New York Times Digital, where she founded the company’s first international sales office in London.
Cook was most recently named a 2020 She Runs It Changing the Game honoree. She also was honored as a 2019 Broadcasting & Cable Digital All-Star and on the 2018 Cynopsis Digital It List. She is an active member of the Internet Advertising Bureau (IAB), Mobile Marketing Association (MMA), Digital Ascendant, Digital Content Next, Advertising Women of New York/She Runs It, and New York Women in Communications. A graduate from Louisiana University with a Bachelor of Arts in English Literature, History and Spanish, Cook currently resides in New York City.
WarnerMedia is a leading media and entertainment company that creates and distributes premium and popular content from a diverse array of talented storytellers and journalists to global audiences through its consumer brands including: HBO, HBO Max, Warner Bros., TNT, TBS, truTV, CNN, DC, New Line, Cartoon Network, Adult Swim, Turner Classic Movies and others. The organization also includes Xandr’s suite of advanced advertising solutions designed to help to improve advertising for brands, publishers, and consumers. WarnerMedia is part of AT&T Inc. (NYSE:T).
Jim CowsertAs VP, Enterprise Brand, Advertising and Media, at Voya Financial, Jim leads brand strategy, creative development and media planning. Jim’s current focus is building the Voya Financial brand introduced in the fall of 2014. His responsibilities include ensuring Voya’s brand is effectively expressed across television, digital, mobile, social and search platforms for consumer and business audiences. He has a passion for developing high impact integrated initiatives with partners, building messaging across touch points, and driving a measurement based culture.
Prior to joining Voya Financial, Jim led agency and client teams developing and executing brand strategy, creative, and media for companies in financial, real estate, healthcare, and retail industries. He has MBA and BA degrees from Duke University and resides in Atlanta.
Susan CredleEvery agency says it wants “to do great creative,” but for Chief Creative Officer Susan Credle, it’s the reason why that matters. “Great creative has to build helpful, meaningful brands for the long-term,” she says. “That’s the sum of what we at Leo Burnett do, and what I’ve set out to do my entire career.”She came to Leo Burnett in the fall of 2009, after more than two decades at BBDO in which she rose from “bathroom-break girl” for the agency’s receptionists to EVP Executive Creative Director. There, Susan reinvented the iconic M&M’s characters; turned Cingular Wireless from a start-up into a leader brand; and created other consistently award-winning work for such clients as Bank of America, FedEx, Gillette, Lowe’s, PepsiCo, Pizza Hut and Visa.
Since joining Leo Burnett, Susan has spearheaded a creative renaissance at the agency through an eye for new top talent, a commitment to work that benefits brands and the world, and a vision for clients that always looks beyond a single campaign or ad.
Susan’s leadership, inspiration and in-the-trenches contributions have led to legacy-respecting yet forward-looking campaigns like McDonald’s Happy Meal “Happy Tales,” Kellogg’s Special K “What Will You Gain When You Lose?” Secret’s “Mean Stinks” anti-bullying campaign and, one of the most beloved and awarded platform ideas, Allstate’s “Mayhem.”“I believe in purpose-driven brands and having pride in something in lasts,” she says. “And, as we say here at Leo, that creativity can transform human behavior.”Susan serves on the Boards of the University of North Carolina’s School of Journalism and Mass Communication, the American Association of Advertising Agencies, the Foundation for EXXcellence and the Creative Circus. She is a member of the Economic Club of Chicago, the Media Council at the Paley Center for Media in New York, the Creative Review Board of the Ad Council and is a supporter of Marwen and One Million Degrees in Chicago.
Adrian D'SouzaRobert D’AsaroKaran DalalKaran heads supply operations for Media.net and manages some of Media.net’s key publisher partnerships working out of the New York office. As one of the first employees, he has been instrumental in Media.net’s rise in the adtech ecosystem. His role over the last 10+ years has been focused on building and managing partnerships across the ad-tech landscape, nurturing strategic alliances and helping drive product strategy.
Prior to Media.net, Karan was an attorney in the Technology & Media practice of one of India’s premier law firms. He is deeply passionate about how access to quality education can help alleviate global poverty and spent over a year living and teaching in a remote village in India to improve the educational infrastructure for teachers and students.
Karan holds a BS in Computer Science and Mathematics from University of Illinois – Urbana-Champaign and a Bachelor of Laws degree from Mumbai University.
Eric DanetzEric joined Thomson Reuters as Head of Revenue in April of 2020. In this role, Eric has oversight of all revenue lines and is responsible for accelerating growth across the Agency and Consumer businesses. He joined Reuters from AccuWeather, where he was Chief Business Officer, overseeing all global revenue-generating products, services, marketing and business development.
As the Head of Revenue for Reuters, Eric will lead our sales and customer success teams globally while establishing a holistic revenue growth strategy involving the targeting of new market segments, diversifying customers and categories, and identifying cross-selling opportunities across the wider portfolio.
Eric is an exceptional sales executive with an impressive track record in building new revenue streams, attracting new customers and scaling high growth media businesses. He reports into the President of Reuters and sits on the Reuters Executive Committee.
David DanzigerDavid Danziger is the Vice President of Enterprise Partnerships at The Trade Desk, a global demand-side platform in the $5B real-time bidding industry. In his role at The Trade Desk, David leads the company's strategic partnerships for data, targeting, and measurement. His emphasis is creating relationships that increase effectiveness of The Trade Desk clients’ media buys through improved front-end targeting or back-end analytics.
David is an adtech and data industry veteran having previously served as senior director of data solutions at Merkle and director of data products at Acxiom.
David is a graduate of The University of Michigan and The University of Texas.
Mainardo De NardisMainardo de Nardis has been CEO of OMD Worldwide since 2009.
OMD Worldwide is a leading global media communications agency, recognized for its global footprint, strategic integration and creative innovation. It has been acknowledged as Most Creative Media Agency by The Gunn Report for nine consecutive years; Adweek Global Media Agency of the Year for 2008, 2009, 2011, 2013 and 2014; and the 2002, 2005, 2009 and 2011 Media Agency of the Year by Advertising Age.
Prior to joining OMD he was CEO of both Aegis Media and Mediaedge:cia Worldwide. He was a co-founder of one of Italy’s “third wave” ad agencies before moving from advertising to media communications to start Medianetwork, Italy’s first media independent.
Mainardo presided over the Cannes Festival’s Media Lions Jury in 2012 and sits on the Boards of Omnicom Media Group and the Ad Council. He resides in NY and London with his family.
Colleen DeCourcyBrian DiLorenzoMiranda DimopoulosMiranda Dimopoulos is the Regional CEO of the IAB SEA+India, a not-for-profit association that elevates the digital industry locally, regionally and globally.
Under her leadership, the membership has grown more than twelvefold in the last five years. An economist and expert on Asia, Miranda is a sought-after public speaker and commentator internationally on the insights and opportunities to grow investment in this diverse region. She has served as a Singapore Government Board Member for Critical Infocomm Technology since 2016, is an official advisor to the Indonesia, Thailand and India Governments and launched the 2018 partnership with the Economic Development Board (EDB) and Workforce Singapore (WSG) for a 2 year programme developing Programmatic talent.
Miranda was one of Campaign APAC’s 40 under 40 2016, CMO Asia and World Brand Congress Top 50 Leaders in Asia 2016, Campaign APAC Women to Watch (Agents of Change) 2016, the only person from APAC on the The Drum New Years Global Honours List 2017, World Women’s Congress Super Influencer 2017 (Top 10 Global Leaders) and Business Top Leader APAC 2018.
Jerry DischlerJerry Dischler is a Vice President and General Manager at Google, and oversees Google’s Advertising products including search, display, shopping, travel and video advertising, as well as analytics.
A 10+ year Ads veteran, Jerry led Google to move beyond plain text ads to deeper experiences, including the development of Ad Sitelinks and Product Listing Ads. Through various leadership roles on the team, he’s played an important role in defining the future of advertising at Google including leading the transition from desktop to mobile advertising, accelerating direct response advertising on YouTube, and developing new ad products for SMBs.
Prior to his current role, Jerry led the product and engineering teams for ads on Google’s owned and operated properties (Search, YouTube, Maps, Gmail, Discover), buying platforms (Google Ads, Search Ads 360, Display & Video 360), and Google’s home-grown sales and support platform. Earlier in his career at Google, Jerry led Google’s commerce products, including Google Checkout (now Google Pay) and Google Product Search (now Google Shopping).
Before Google, Jerry served as the Director of Engineering at Avolent where he was instrumental in developing the company’s award-winning billing and payment products. He also worked in engineering and leadership roles at Hyperion, Sana Security, and Accenture, where his work focused on enterprise billing, customer care, and security software.
Jerry earned his bachelor’s degree from the University of Chicago and his MBA from The Wharton School of Business.
Michael DorfMichael Dorf serves as Vice President of Revenue Operations at Univision Communications Inc. Michael oversees all of Yield Management, Ad Operations, Programmatic and Advertising Solutions.
Previously, Michael lead the Media Operations team at Freewheel, a Comcast Company and was able to bridge the gaps between Linear, Digital and Programmatic advertising. Prior to that he was at Conde Nast where he led the Ad Operations across Video, Programmatic, Display and Native. He started his career running Revenue Operations for Blip Networks which was eventually acquired by Disney via Maker Studios.
Gilad ElbazGil Elbaz is the Founder and CEO of Factual, a data company that enables developers, publishers and advertisers to build highly relevant mobile experiences using the context of location. Prior to Factual, Gil co-founded Applied Semantics Inc. (ASI), which developed contextual advertising products, including ASI’s AdSense. Google acquired ASI in 2003, where Gil stayed on as the director of engineering, continuing to work on AdSense and other products. In 2008, Gil founded The Common Crawl Foundation, a non-profit with the goal of democratizing access to web information to enable greater innovation in research, business and education. He continues to serve on the board there as well as on the board of the X Prize Foundation. Gil is an active angel investor. He recently co-founded TenOneTen ventures with David Waxman, and his notable investments include Climate Corporation (acquired by Monsanto for $1.2 billion), GoodReads (acquired by Amazon), Scopely, and Kaggle. Gil earned a B.S. with a double major in Engineering & Applied Science and Economics from the California Institute of Technology.
Dennis EllisTom EslingerTom works across Saatchi & Saatchi’s worldwide digital capability and is based in NYC and spends 50% of his time in China as Greater China Chief Digital Officer. He has both a worldwide focus across integrated creative, strategy and operations, adding talent, new capabilities and forging worldwide partnerships with creative partners and platforms. In 2014, Tom added Digital Executive Creative Director to the Asia Pacific/China region to his creative and strategic duties. Tom is a highly awarded digital and mobile creative director, with 69 Cannes Lions across multiple categories and 100s of international awards. Following his Presidency of the Cyber Lions, Tom was the first President of the Mobile Lions in 2012. The Creative Data jury at Cannes 2015 is Tom’s fifth Cannes jury, having served on the 2002 Cyber and 2006 Titanium juries. He is a member of Saatchi & Saatchi’s Worldwide Creative Board and works on the development of the annual New Director’s Showcase at Cannes Lions. Tom’s creative work is part of the permanent design collections of Museum of Modern Art in NYC and the Smithsonian Institute in Washington DC. Naturally Tom’s work has become all things social and mobile. He champions the necessity, tactics, and possibilities of mobile advertising and marketing in his recently published book “Mobile Magic”, where he takes readers step-by-step through his process for creating truly mobile ideas. Tom lives with his partner Gregory and their Lakeland Terrier Berkeley Jackson in the Financial District of Manhattan.
Anne EspinalAnne Espinal joins IAB as an Account Manager for the Member Engagement and Development team focusing on post-sale management. Previously, Anne was with Nielsen on the Client Solutions Team working directly with clients to inform and support Nielsen products for both traditional TV and digital offerings. Prior to that, Anne worked on the Audio team at Univision, managing sold audio sponsorships from inception to execution as well as planning and strategizing media plans. Anne brings her experience in client relationship and project management to execute seamless sponsorships and campaigns for IAB and its members.
Towney FeehanTownsend Feehan is CEO of IAB Europe. Prior to joining IAB Europe, Townsend worked for Microsoft Legal & Corporate Affairs in Brussels and ran EU industry associations in the ICT, consumer electronics and biotechnology sectors. Townsend has an M. Phil. in European policy from the law faculty of the University of Edinburgh.
Konrad FeldmanKonrad Feldman, CEO, co-founded and launched Quantcast in 2006 along with Paul Sutter to transform the effectiveness of online advertising through the use of science and scalable computing. Prior to co-founding Quantcast, Feldman co-founded Searchspace (now Fortent) the leading provider of terrorist financing detection and anti-money laundering software for the world’s financial services industry. As CEO of Searchspace’s North American business, he established the business in the US and directed its rapid growth to become a market leader. Prior to Searchspace, Feldman was a Research Fellow in the Intelligent Systems Laboratory at University College London. Feldman holds a Bachelor of Science in Computer Science from University College, London.
Tony FicarrottaTony is an experienced lawyer specializing in issues affecting digital advertising and media. Most recently, Tony was attorney at ZwillGen, where his practice focused on advising ad-tech platforms, social media companies, and digital publishers on strategy and compliance in connection with privacy requirements. Tony previously served as counsel for the Network Advertising Initiative and worked at an international law firm. Tony holds a J.D. from the Duke University School of Law, and an M.A. in philosophy from Georgetown University.
Kirsten FlanikKirsten is the Managing Director of BBDO New York.â€¨â€¨In addition to her agency responsibilities, Kirsten oversees the Mars business (which includes more than a dozen of the company’s major chocolate, pet and food brands), FedEx, ExxonMobil and the agency’s public service efforts in support of Autism Speaks. â€¨â€¨Since joining BBDO in 2006, Kirsten has been named a “Woman to Watch” as well as one of the “100 Most Influential Women in Advertising” by Ad Age.
â€¨Outside of her day-to-day responsibilities, Kirsten serves on the board of Somerset Hills Learning Institute, one of the premier institutions for children with Autism, is a member of Advertising Women of New York and BBDO’s Women Leadership Council, a group dedicated to helping women succeed in the workplace.â€¨â€¨ Kirsten is a 1989 graduate of the University of Florida. She currently resides in Brooklyn with her husband and their two children.
Tom FochettaTom Fochetta is an experienced business leader and media veteran with more than 20+ years of digital advertising experience. He currently serves as Vice President of Samsung Ads, a leading provider of Advanced TV advertising solutions.
Tom has a proven track record for spearheading high-impact sales teams at world-class media, commerce and hardware companies, including Google and Amazon. As the founding executive of Samsung Ads in 2015, Tom was tasked with establishing its global ad sales platform. Among his responsibilities, he leads the Americas’ ad sales, client solutions, and operations, and oversees the Company’s advertising platform across Samsung’s Smart TV and digital ecosystem.
Tom reports up into Samsung’s Corporate Offices in South Korea and frequently informs Executive Leadership of Market Conditions to seek further investment. Armed with a deep understanding of viewership preferences and Smart TV usage, Samsung Ads is a leader in Advanced TV, bringing innovation to advertising and empowering more efficient and effective media strategies. Under Tom’s leadership, Samsung Ads has achieved significant year-over-year growth over the past five years.
Through acquisitions, technology enhancements and the development of an end- to-end tech stack, Tom has opened up a new world of opportunities for the sales team and their clients. In fact, Tom championed the acquisition of AdGear and was part of the Deal Team from Samsung’s M&A arm to acquire the foundation of a fully owned and operated tech stack.
Today, Samsung Ads works with Fortune 500 advertisers selling and servicing ads natively, across over-the-top (OTT)/Connected TV, display and mobile, leveraging its unique audience platform. Tom is an outspoken advocate for the Advanced TV industry, not only sitting on the IAB’s Board of Directors but actively participating in many other industry associations to help educate the industry on Connected TV and evangelize Samsung Ads’ platform.
Tom holds an MBA and a Bachelor of Science in Marketing and Management from St. Johns University. He lives on Long Island with his wife and two sons.
Carl FremontKurt FuleppKurt Fulepp is the Global Chief Product Officer of AccuWeather. In this key leadership role, Kurt is responsible for the vision, strategy and design for the enterprise-wide product portfolio, as well as brand design, creative services, audience & analytics, business intelligence and mobile app development.
As CPO, Kurt is charged with every element of the AccuWeather product roadmap, from conceptualization to launch and post-launch performance. Drawing on his extensive experience working at the intersection of cutting-edge digital products and premium content, he leads the development of the latest ecosystems of products, leveraging artificial intelligence, big data, and connected and smart devices. His expertise in multiplatform storytelling, product management, content commercialization, and cross-platform brand development shapes how AccuWeather delivers weather information to consumers and enterprises around the world.
Before joining AccuWeather, Kurt served as Vice President and Digital General Manager of News and Business at Time, Inc leading the digital brands of TIME, Money & Fortune. Previously, he was Vice President and Head of Product at AOL, Inc., where he oversaw product management, technology and design of AOL’s core business of AOL.com, as well as a portfolio of lifestyle brands focused on home, food, style, weddings and women’s leadership. Concurrent with his AOL tenure, Kurt also served as General Manager of MAKERS.com, providing end-to-end leadership for this first-of-its-kind multiplatform video destination, which profiled exceptional women and their groundbreaking achievements.
Earlier in his career, Kurt served as Senior Manager, Consumer Marketing for NineMSN (Microsoft’s joint-venture in Australia) covering Bing, MSN and Windows Live (incl. Hotmail, SkyDrive & WebApps), as well as Director of Marketing at Nine Television Network Australia; one of Australia’s largest commercial television networks.
Kurt is also as an adjunct professor in the Master of Science in Publishing – Digital Media program at New York University, teaching a course that examines the various business models in digital media and what it takes to build a successful digital publishing business.
He resides in New York City and based at AccuWeather’s New York office at 7 World Trade Center.
Jackie GarciaJackie has extensive accounting experience in the non-profit sector working alongside the Archdiocese of NY working in customer support, accounts receivable, cash receipts, and treasury functions. Jackie is thrilled about starting her new role at IAB.
Isabelle Garrick-OkoliIsabelle joins IAB as a Salesforce Coordinator. Prior to coming to IAB, Isabelle worked as an engagement manager at a DC consulting firm where she also administered their Salesforce instance. That nurtured an interest in pursuing Salesforce more deliberately as a career path and led her here. In her free time, she likes to make candles, do crosswords and explore new cities. Isabelle looks forward to learning from and working with the team at IAB.
Gina GarrubboGina Garrubbo is President and CEO of National Public Media (NPM), where she is committed to ensuring the continued growth of NPR and the public media system via funding from corporate sponsors. Garrubbo has spent more than 20 years in traditional and digital media growing marketing and sales teams, launching brands and building companies. She was one of the builders of Women.com, one of the first websites for women, and BlogHer, which brought independent voices to millions of readers. Garrubbo built advertising sales teams for Oxygen Media, Discovery Communications and in syndicated television. She is Chair of the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB) Board of Directors. She also sits on the Board of Directors of Tappp (an OTT video service), Glen Highland Farm and the Philanthropic Leadership board of EatREAL.org.
Erik GeislerErik leads the Facebook US & Canada Agency teams based in New York and is part of NA Sales Team. His team’s mission is to advance the value that agencies bring their partners through the “relentless pursuit of progress”! Additionally, Erik is the executive sponsor for the Facebook Reserve video solutions that feature In-Stream videos in Watch. He previously led the Technology and Telecommunication team at Facebook for over four years. Prior to Facebook, Erik has founded several companies under the common theme of “changing the way brands advertise”. In 1994, he was a founding partner at Student Advantage, a college marketing company that is credited with establishing the benefits of Youth and Student marketing. In 2005, as a partner and Chief Strategy Officer at Noise, his digital agency produced the first ever marketing campaign on Facebook for Chase credit card services. Erik lives in Brooklyn with his wife Rachel, daughter Ryan (12) and son Logan (11) and enjoys cooking, golf and snowboarding.
Quentin GeorgeAs Chief Innovation Officer, Quentin George is responsible for the overall growth, development and implementation of Mediabrands’ intelligence capabilities including its incubation practice and the physical and virtual Media Labs. Quentin serves as the key driver of all group activities that address not only the complexities of the digital arena for Mediabrands’ clients, but also educates and informs our clients on the hidden opportunities within the space. Internally, he will continue to transform the Mediabrands culture, creating a toolkit of resources that connects the network with a complete catalog of Mediabrands’ services and platform capabilities, partner solutions and case studies. In addition, Quentin will identify and introduce Mediabrands and IPG leadership to potential technology and content partners that are ideally suited to enable our network and clients to grow.
One of the most tenured leaders in the digital arena, Quentin was appointed Chief Digital Officer, Mediabrands in 2009. He joined the IPG Network in 2007 and was named Global Lead, Digital Media and Strategic Innovation for Universal McCann. Prior to his role at UM, he served as Chief of Corporate Development and Managing Director for Organic, Inc., where he grew the business substantially since joining in October 2004. During his tenure at Organic, he led assignments for clients such as Sprint, 20th Century Fox, Mitsubishi Motors and GeekSquad.
Quentin was SVP of Client Services at Avenue A/Razorfish, where he co-managed the San Francisco and Los Angeles offices and was responsible for driving online-based initiatives for clients such as Sun Microsystems, Oracle, Disney, Cisco Systems and Genentech. Back in 1994, he cofounded Electric Ocean, an internationally renowned interactive marketing agency based in Cape Town, South Africa, where he won one of the first Clios ever awarded for digital work. He’s also a founding member and former cochairman of the Digital Interactive Media Association (DIMA).
Quentin resides and makes wine in San Francisco with his wife and children.
Adam GerberAdam Gerber is Global President, Media, for Essence, a data-driven global agency that is part of WPP’s GroupM. In this role, he oversees media capabilities across all channels. This includes driving the agency’s planning, investment, activation and ad operations disciplines and their intersection with GroupM. Gerber’s priority is to build and scale innovative, cross-channel investment models rooted in data and outcome-based metrics that are tied to clients’ business success. He stepped into this role in 2018 after serving as Essence’s SVP, Investment, North America.
Gerber joined Essence in 2017 after spending six years at ABC/Disney where he departed as SVP, Client Development & Communications. Before ABC, he served as Chief Marketing Officer of Quantcast, where he was and an active industry evangelist for the digitally-oriented audience measurement and targeting company.
Prior to Quantcast, he served as VP, Advertising Product & Strategy, for Boston-based Brightcove, Inc. Previously, he was SVP, Director of Innovation & Strategy for Mediavest Worldwide, and Senior Partner/Director, Media Strategy for The Digital Edge (now Wavemaker).
In earlier roles, Gerber served as VP, Associate Media Director at Ammirati Puris Lintas; Account Manager/Interactive Marketing for America Online and Media Supervisor/Media Planner for both JWT and D’Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles. He began his career as a paralegal at Sidley & Austin in Washington, DC.
Evan GiamancoEvan Giamanco is senior vice president of sales strategy and operations at CNN Digital. In this role, Giamanco is responsible for the development and execution of CNN Digital’s advertising strategy and ad product development efforts. Based in New York, he reports to Christine Cook, senior vice president & chief revenue officer of CNN Digital.
Giamanco plays a key role in creating a holistic sales approach across CNN’s digital business, which includes premium verticals, mobile products, programmatic, emerging businesses and Great Big Story, while also strategizing digital revenue and product development opportunities that are in line with the company’s go-to-market strategies.
Before taking on his current role, Giamanco served as vice president of news content partnerships at Turner Ignite, where he developed innovative advertising solutions and powerful branded content campaigns across the company’s news brands.
Giamanco was previously vice president of business operations at SimpleReach, a company that specializes in providing content creators with measurement and optimization capabilities across digital and social channels. There, he built an operations team from the ground up, while leading campaign management and marketing across the company. Prior to SimpleReach, Giamanco was vice president of Business Insider Studios & ad strategy at Business Insider, and spent over nine years of his career at People.com, where he established his digital background.
Giamanco has a Bachelor of Business Administration in marketing and e-commerce from Fordham University, as well as a Master of Business Administration in marketing and e-commerce from St. John’s University.
WarnerMedia is a leading media and entertainment company that creates and distributes premium and popular content from a diverse array of talented storytellers and journalists to global audiences through its consumer brands including: HBO, HBO Now, HBO Max, Warner Bros., TNT, TBS, truTV, CNN, DC Entertainment, New Line, Cartoon Network, Adult Swim, Turner Classic Movies and others.
Warner Media is part of AT&T Inc. (NYSE:T).
Rajeev GoelRajeev Goel co-founded PubMatic in 2006, based on the belief that publishers are underserved from a technology and services perspective, and set out to build an automation software company focused on publishers. Under his leadership, the company has grown and matured into a major enterprise provider with more than 350 employees and 13 locations around the globe. The high pace of revenue and profit growth is fueled by Rajeev’s commitment to help publishers protect, monetize and manage their most valuable asset – the relationship between consumers, content and brands.
Rajeev is a serial entrepreneur who has raised more than $250 million in funding throughout his career.
Prior to PubMatic, he co-founded Chipshot.com, a leading online retailer of custom-built golf equipment, where he served as vice president of technology. At Chipshot, Rajeev also led product management and development, helping grow the company into a $30 million business. An experienced management consultant, he was also a principal at Diamond Management and Technology Consultants, an IT strategy consulting firm for Fortune 2000 clients, where he led teams on IT strategy engagements. In addition, Rajeev was a product marketing executive at SAP, where he was responsible for global go-to-market strategy for new products.
Rajeev served as a member of the Board of Directors of the Ad Council, a nonprofit organization and the largest producer of national public service campaigns in the U.S. He holds a master’s degree in computer science from the University of Pennsylvania and a bachelor’s degree in economics, political science and Spanish from the Johns Hopkins University.
Alanna GombertAlanna is Head of Advertising Technology at ConsenSys, a blockchain company focused on the adoption of decentralized networks and economies. She is also the CEO of the Digital Asset Trade Association (DATA), an advocacy group formed in Davos in 2018 for Distributed Ledger Technology. DATA helps to shape public policy issues to support the growth of digital assets, digital identity, smart-contracts and digital currencies and worked extensively in Wyoming and Colorado on blockchain and cryptocurrency legislation. Prior to DATA, Alanna was Global CRO at MetaX where she oversaw product creation, strategy, and go-to-market including the adChain and adToken dApps on Ethereum and the first Token Curated Registry on the Ethereum Mainnet. Before she entered the blockchain sphere, Alanna ran global advertising standards General Manager of the IAB Tech Lab. Alanna had senior roles at Accuen/Omnicom Media Group, Condé Nast and at Admeld (acquired by Google) where she helped grow Real Time Bidding from an idea into an advertising industry mainstay.
Jae GoodmanJae Goodman is Chief Creative Officer and Co-Head of CAA Marketing, a division of leading entertainment and sports agency Creative Artists Agency (CAA). Goodman works in the Los Angeles office and helps provide corporate clients with creative solutions that leverage the power of entertainment to build brands and drive business results. CAA Marketing clients include Coca-Cola, General Motors, Diageo, Chipotle, Samsung, Neiman Marcus, Burberry, Keurig, Fender and The MacArthur Foundation, among others.
CAA Marketing was the driving force behind Hasbro’s Transformers film franchise and Chipotle’s “Cultivate” campaign, including the animated short film “Back to the Start” featuring Willie Nelson covering Coldplay and its follow-up “The Scarecrow.” The campaign has won four Cannes Grand Prix awards in four different categories in the past three years.
CAA Marketing is responsible for the first and second brand films ever accepted to the Sundance Film Festival, the first-ever live interactive show on Hulu, nine Webby Awards in six years for four different clients, and eight Emmy nominations and four wins for such clients as Old Navy, Chipotle, and Dolby.
Prior to CAA, Goodman served as Senior Vice President and Executive Creative Director at Publicis & Hal Riney in San Francisco, overseeing all creative talent and work. Previously, he held creative and executive positions at Wieden+Kennedy, Leagas~Delaney, and Ogilvy & Mather.
Under Goodman’s leadership, CAA Marketing’s work has been selected as one of TED’s “10 Ads Worth Spreading,” and in 2014, Goodman was named to both Fast Company’s Most Creative People in Business 1000 and Ad Age’s Creativity 50 List.
Eden GorceyMs. Gorcey overseas product and advertising sales strategy for Condé Nast, where she focuses on turning the company’s unique assets – including data, video, programmatic, and experiential offerings – into buyable solutions that drive results for clients. Eden has held leadership roles in both agency and publisher settings, where her work leading media strategy for brands including P&G, Microsoft and Coca Cola has contributed to her status as an industry-recognized innovator.
Brian GottesmanBrian Gottesman leads monetization product development at Flipboard — the worlds largest curated content platform, with over 140 million users. In this role he oversees all monetization products from strategy to planning and execution. Prior to his time at Flipboard Brian ran product management for Amazon’s Video DSP, driving revenue growth, verification vendor business development, and feature expansion including pre-bid, performance optimization and OTT targeting. Before Amazon Brian was VP of Product at Critical Media where he designed, launched and managed Syndicaster, the first cloud-based video editing and distribution system for TV stations. He began his career at Harvard University, building web platforms for a range of departments and institutes including the Life Sciences Division, the Center for Brain Science and the Nieman Foundation.
Philippe GueltonMeredith GuinessMeredith Green is an experienced analytics professional who loves data-driven storytelling, bringing to life the meaning (the “why”) behind consumer behavior. She has spent the majority of her career agency-side, holding positions across digital planning and analytics and has a strong passion for cross-functional learning. Meredith holds bachelor’s degrees in Psychology and Italian Studies from Emory University and loves to travel, eat (is a big foodie!), and spend time with family and friends.
Jay HabeggerJay Habegger is the co-founder and CEO of ownerIQ. Jay is a pioneer in digital media and advertising having over 20 years experience. He has built The Q from it’s humble beginnings to leading the industry in second party data and as the leading programmatic solution for digital advertisers, retailers and brands. Previously, Jay was the CEO and president of Bitpipe, leading the company through to its sale to TechTarget in 2004 in a $40 million transaction Jay has been a guest speaker at events attended by C-level marketing executives discussing the evolution of digital shopper marketing, retailer monetization, and programmatic advertising. He has also written several bylines for prominent advertising and retail publications such as Ad Age, Internet Retailer, Dealerscope, and TWICE Magazine. In addition, Habegger was acknowledged in The Rayno Report’s 2014 list of Top 11 ad tech visionaries. ownerIQ has been named one of the 50 Fastest Growing Private Companies in Massachusetts by the Boston Business Journal in 2017, as a MITX Award Finalist, in Ad Age’s 2015 B2B Best Awards, Digiday Signal Awards 2015, CIO Review’s 2015 Top 20 Most Promising Retail Technologies and as a Hot Tech to Watch in 2014.
Jeff HagenJeff Hagen is the Group Director of Connections Planning & Investment for The Coca-Cola Company’s USA division. In this role he is responsible for helping build Coca-Cola’s integrated marketing strategy; focusing on building a Brand’s ability to connect with consumers using media, data and technology, and owned touchpoints across a consumer’s daily journey. With 15+ years of experience, Jeff has led both planning & investment teams at Cingular/AT&T Wireless, The Home Depot, and Arby’s. He has also worked at world renowned advertising agencies including BBDO, Initiative and OMD leading media strategy and investment across automotive, consumer packaged goods, financial services and entertainment industry accounts.
Most recently, under his leadership, the Coca-Cola Connections team has been recognized for industry leading work in integrated marketing across video, social, search, outdoor and radio and has received various awards from Effie’s, Media Post, and the Festival of Media.
Jeff lives in Sandy Springs, Georgia with his wife, Leslie, and two daughters. Jeff is an active member of his children’s school, church community and youth sports association.
Rachael HaleyRachael Haley, the Regional Marketing Director for the Americas at Airbnb, she oversees strategy and execution of all regional integrated marketing initiatives across all Airbnb businesses. She leads a team responsible for marketing content development, social media strategy and execution, and connections and media activation.
With more than 13 years in the industry, Rachael leans on her deep expertise in media and marketing strategy, including communication planning, strategic partnership development, buy negotiation, plan execution, and measurement, to build innovative marketing campaigns that disrupt the category while driving business results. Prior to Airbnb, Rachael worked in media planning and buying at a number of agencies including OMD before moving into a marketing strategy role at Netflix where she led US launch campaigns for a number of Netflix Originals including House of Cards and Orange is the New BlackJohn HalleyJohn Halley serves as Chief Operating Officer, Advertising Revenue, and Executive Vice President, Advanced Marketing Solutions (“AMS”) for ViacomCBS. In this role, Halley oversees commercial and business operations for the advertising team across the company’s leading portfolio of broadcast, entertainment, news and sports networks, as well as ViacomCBS’ advertising product suite and go-to-market strategy across its digital, social, and advanced advertising offerings spanning BET, CBS, CBS All Access, Comedy Central, MTV, Nickelodeon and Pluto TV, among others.
Halley is the former Chairman and serves on the Board of Directors of OpenAP, the television industry’s advanced audience platform, whose consortium membership includes ViacomCBS, Fox, NBCUniversal, AMC Networks, The Weather Channel and Univision. He also serves on the Board of Directors of Blockgraph, an industry-operated data and insights platform owned by ViacomCBS, Comcast NBCUniversal and Charter Communications that helps media companies and advertisers securely and transparently collaborate to apply data across TV and premium video inventory.
Halley is the Chairman of the New York Chapter of the March of Dimes, and serves on the Board of Directors of Literacy Inc., a New York-based childhood literacy organization. He holds an MBA from the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania and an Economics degree from Santa Clara University.
Matt HarringtonMatthew Harrington oversees Edelman’s four regions as well as Edelman Berland, the firm’s research arm; human resources; legal; information technology; and conflict management. A 21-year Edelman veteran, Matthew is a specialist in corporate positioning and reputation management. His expertise includes crisis communications, merger and acquisition activity and initial public offerings. Currently, Matthew provides corporate and/or issues management counsel to a range of clients, including, GE, Charles Schwab & Company, Samsung and Starbucks. Matthew is a graduate of Denison University, where he also serves on the Board of Trustees. He is a member of the Public Relations Society of America and is also a board member of the World Food Program USA, the Council of Public Relations Firms and the Classic Stage Company.
Eric HarrisEric Harris is the President & Chief Operating Officer at Cheddar, the leading post-cable network currently broadcasting Cheddar, a business news network, and Cheddar Big News, a fast-paced, young, non-partisan general news and headline news network. Before Cheddar, Eric was Chief Operating Officer at KnowMe, an innovative video and sharing platform.
Prior to that, Eric was BuzzFeed’s Chief Business Operations Officer and was responsible for all business operations and a global team of over 100 rockstars that spanned sales strategy & planning, marketing, research, events, ad product, account management, ad operations, social discovery, client analytics, and project management. Eric started at BuzzFeed as the 6th employee and left the company of over 1,000 employees 7 years later.
Eric has also worked as VP of Product Management at Operative Media, where he helped to build their best of breed Advertising Management platform, and as Director of Operations at Washingtonpost.com after spending several years doing consulting work at Price Waterhouse.
Eric has an MBA from the Tepper School of Business at Carnegie Mellon University and lives with his wife, two children, and labradoodle in Brooklyn.
Todd HenryTodd Henry is a Senior Product Manager with the IAB Tech Lab. He has 15 years of experience in the digital publishing industry working for Weather Underground, The Weather Company, and IBM. With a background in engineering and product management, Todd’s previous companies include Intuit, Brøderbund Software, and Mattel.
Michelle HeviaJeremy HlavacekAs CRO for IBM Watson Advertising, Jeremy Hlavacek is responsible for all global advertising sales efforts including premium direct sales, programmatic sales, agency partnerships and data partnerships. His teams work across Watson Advertising’s portfolio of media, data, and AI-powered technology solutions, which includes The Weather Company’s consumer platforms such as weather.com and The Weather Channel apps. Watson Advertising’s offerings help agencies and marketers improve decision-making and drive value across key facets of the marketing lifecycle – from media planning to targeting and activation to measurement and optimization.
Previously, Hlavacek was SVP, global automated monetization for The Weather Company. In that role, he oversaw all programmatic monetization efforts globally and the data partnerships team, which drives off-property data and inventory partnerships with platforms and other publishers. Hlavacek was promoted from vice president of programmatic, where he was responsible for all domestic programmatic sales efforts, platform relationships and programmatic operations. Under his leadership, the programmatic business grew 500% over a 3 year period to become one of the largest and most sophisticated sell side programmatic businesses in the industry. In 2017, AdExchanger ranked The Weather Company’s programmatic business as #2 in the industry among all publishers in media and broadcasting. Hlavacek joined Weather in early 2013 as vice president of operations and strategic partnerships for the company’s WEATHERfx division, where he oversaw technology partnerships and business operations to support the WEATHERfx business.
Prior to Weather, Hlavacek was vice president of strategy and business operations at Varick Media Management, where he helped to build one of the first programmatic trading desks on the agency side. He was responsible for strategic platform partnerships in the ad tech/real-time bidding ecosystem, as well as the business and financial operations of the company.
Hlavacek’s previous experience includes building out digital marketing and gaming experiences at LEGO Toys, directing advertising strategy and business development at Dotmenu (an online food ordering startup acquired by GrubHub/Seamless), and building out digital experiences for entertainment programming at CBS Television. On the agency side, Jeremy has held senior strategic roles at Ogilvy and Cadient Group, where he advised clients in healthcare, financial services and technology.
Hlavacek holds a master’s degree in business administration from Cornell University, a master’s degree in media and communication from the London School of Economics and Political Science, and a bachelor’s degree from the College of William and Mary.
Jesse HorwitzBorn and raised in New York, Jesse Horwitz has always had a strong grasp of economics and finance. He studied both fields at Columbia University, where he graduated Phi Beta Kappa/Magna Cum Laude. During his time at Columbia, he also developed an interest in Film Studies, although following an internship with Sony Picture’s Television Division, he quickly learned that a life in Hollywood was not for him.
Horwitz ultimately decided to take a different path, and spent a year at Harvard Law School, where he met his husband, Mark Severs and secured an internship with Bridgewater Associates. It was at Bridgewater that Jesse met his future business partner, Benjamin Cogan. Horwitz moved on from Harvard to work full time for Bridgewater and then founded Gadfly, a systematic trading firm with Michael Naber, a colleague from Bridgewater.
Horwitz joined the investment team for Columbia University’s endowment in 2013, where he spent the last few years investing across the alternatives landscape – private equity, venture capital, hedge funds and real estate. During his time at Columbia, he built a strong network across the investor community, including Two River, a life sciences merchant bank that invested in and brought together the round for Hubble.
Now Horwitz is Co-Founder and Co-CEO at Hubble, a direct-to-consumer, subscription contact lens company, where Horwitz focuses his efforts on fundraising, business development and regulation compliance. Since launching in November 2016, Hubble has become one of the fastest growing, direct-to-consumer e-commerce companies in the U.S. Horwitz and Cogan earned a spot on Forbes’ prestigious “30 Under 30” list in 2016 and Hubble recently extended its footprint into Canada, the UK and the Netherlands in the past year.
Travis HoweTravis Howe has joined ESPN as SVP, Platform Ad Sales Strategy & Global Operations. In this new role, Howe will be responsible for establishing the go-to-market strategy for ESPN’s digital advertising business moving forward to enhance the overall ESPN Platform. He will work closely with the sales marketing, product and technology teams and be based in the company’s New York office, reporting to Ed Erhardt, president, global sales & marketing.Said Erhardt, “Travis is an outstanding and creative executive who has the vision to identify, develop and execute our key priorities for the digital sales team. His expertise and thorough understanding of the evolving digital media marketplace will help enhance and drive the entirety of our portfolio.”Howe joins ESPN from Mediaocean, where he served as the executive vice president and general manager of global platform solutions. Throughout his tenure, Howe led the company’s go-to-market, cross-platform strategy, sales and client services supporting digital, cross-media and television ad sales revenue and technology for global media, entertainment and publisher companies.
Prior to Mediaocean, Howe was senior vice president, head of digital ad sales for the Americas at Sony, where he oversaw Sony’s digital entertainment division across Sony Pictures Entertainment, Sony Pictures Television, Sony Music and PlayStation. His previous roles include consulting, operational strategy and change management at Accenture.
Howe currently serves as an executive member of the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB), as well as for The Paley Center. He also serves on the Board of Directors for the Lighthouse Guild and Chairman of the Music School Advisory Board. He graduated from the University of Colorado, Boulder with a double major in finance and international business.
Scott HoweScott Howe is the Chief Executive Officer of LiveRamp (NYSE: RAMP), a software-as-a-service (SaaS) company that provides the identity platform for powering exceptional experiences. LiveRamp is the largest provider of identity resolution services, serving more than 1,000 companies across a broad range of sectors including brands, agencies, technology vendors, data providers, and publishers.From 2011 to Sept. 2018, Howe served as CEO and president of LiveRamp’s former parent company, Acxiom—a technology and services company dedicated to providing the data foundation for the world’s best marketers.
Throughout his tenure, Acxiom won countless industry awards and accolades, including recognition for the industry’s Best Innovation, Partner of the Year by the one of the world’s largest financial services companies and Supplier of the Year by the world’s largest retailer. In 2014, Fast Company named Howe one of the world’s Most Creative People.Before taking the reins at Acxiom in 2011, Howe held executive roles at Microsoft and aQuantive, where his teams built the world’s largest digital agency (Avenue A|Razorfish); pioneered people-based media buying (DRIVE Performance Media, aka the Microsoft Media Network); and developed the systems utilized for ad serving and attribution (Atlas International). He began his career at The Boston Consulting Group and Kidder, Peabody & Company, Inc.
When he’s not helping LiveRamp deploy the world’s most advanced and trusted offline and digital identity resolution technologies, Howe can be found serving as scout master for Troop 28 in Burlingame, Calif., canvassing the country in his refurbished 1956 vintage Airstream trailer or designing and building furniture in his garage workshop. A native of Milwaukee, he is a proud fan and part owner of the Green Bay Packers.Scott graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University with a degree in economics, and earned an MBA from Harvard University. He most recently served on the board of directors of Blue Nile, the largest online retailer of certified diamonds and fine jewelry, and is a former director of the Internet Advertising Bureau (IAB) and Turn, Inc., a digital advertising company.
Larry HuntLarry Hunt leads Video Investment for AT&T at Hearts and Science. Included in his responsibilities are AT&T’s Mobility, Directv and Business to Business Solutions brands in addition to Cricket Wireless.
Prior to joining the Hearts & Science, Larry was Senior Vice President, National Video Investment at Zenith. Over 14 years, Larry’s tenure focused on Verizon Wireless while working across a number of top brands including Sonic Restaurants, Hulu, Hallmark Channel, JP Morgan Chase, Darden Restaurants, and Ubisoft. Prior to Zenith Larry had spent years working at Initiative, True North and Y&R. At those agencies, Larry serviced brands such as Subaru, Jergens, American Airlines, Nortel Networks, US Army, Dr Pepper and Miller Beer.
Larry is a graduate of Baruch College and resides in Cranford, New Jersey with his wife Jennifer, daughter Isabelle and sons Owen and Harrison.
Jia HyunJia Hyun is a global marketing and digital strategy executive with a 20-year record of driving marketing innovation to generate double-digit revenue growth for Fortune 500 firms, including LinkedIn, GE Capital, Citigroup, American Express, and MasterCard International. She is a strategic leader who has created and led digital transformation initiatives, built ecommerce capabilities, and orchestrated integrated marketing teams programs and data strategies across multi-national marketing organizations.
As Vice President, Jia currently leads the sales and client services teams across North America for LinkedIn’s $2B advertising business. Jia holds a Master of Business Administration with a concentration in Marketing and Information Systems from New York University. She lives in New York with her husband and 2 boys. She is an enthusiastic amateur pickle maker and prolific home cook who balances her love of food with adventure, singing, and dancing.
Stu IngisStuart Ingis, Partner at Venable LLP, is nationally recognized as a leading attorney on privacy, marketing, advertising, eCommerce, and Internet law. He co-leads Venable’s privacy practice, which won the Chambers USA Award for Excellence for the top privacy practice and top advertising practice in the United States. He has also been repeatedly listed in the first tier of privacy attorneys in Chambers USA, Legal 500 and ComputerWorld magazine.
Mr. Ingis regularly represents companies in the media, communications, Internet, information services, advertising, and retail industries before the US Congress and the Federal Trade Commission as well as before other federal and state agencies. He defends companies in investigations by the FTC and State Consumer Protection Authorities. He regularly counsels clients on privacy and marketing issues and practices. He conducts internal assessments of company practices and products, and works with companies to design and implement compliance systems and best practices. He has represented CEOs in testimony before Congressional Committees.
Mr. Ingis brings coalitions together and leads self-regulatory efforts in the eCommerce, online, privacy, and data security space. He serves as general and policy counsel to the Direct Marketing Association, Washington advertising and privacy counsel to the Interactive Advertising Bureau, and general and policy counsel to the Digital Advertising Alliance.
Aimee IrwinAimee Irwin serves as VP of Strategy and Partnerships at Experian Marketing Services. Aimee is a skilled strategy and corporate development executive with deep experience in digital marketing and advertising and track record of success in developing and building profitable new digital and mobile businesses at both early stage and public companies. Aimee led strategic partnerships and strategic initiatives for Nielsen’s Marketing Cloud where she negotiated and managed strategic data and identity management partnerships supporting Nielsen’s data targeting and marketing effectiveness businesses. Aimee also served as SVP of Strategy and Partnerships at Verve Mobile, a leading location-based mobile advertising platform. At Verve, Aimee developed and led Verve’s mobile application business and inventory partnerships with hundreds of media companies. Prior to Verve, Aimee was VP of Strategy and Corporate Development at AOL, where she was responsible for strategic planning, mergers and acquisitions, and strategic partnerships for AOL’s advertising businesses. Previously, Aimee held executive positions at several successful internet and mobile companies including: Lightningcast, an Internet video advertising company now part of AOL, Leap Wireless, a large U.S. wireless carrier and Backwire, an internet and mobile marketing company acquired by Leap. Aimee started her career in consulting with KPMG and Bain and Company. Aimee has a BS from Georgetown University and an MBA from Kellogg.
Julie JacobsJulie Jacobs is General Counsel of Yahoo.
Julie has over two decades of experience in the global media technology industry. She is a proven leader who identifies strategic business priorities and effectively executes against them while promoting organizational culture and values and protecting consumer and company interests. In her current role, she led the integration of the Yahoo and AOL Legal Departments following the acquisition of Yahoo and is responsible for all Legal, Regulatory, Privacy and Compliance matters for Verizon Media.
Karyn JohnsonKaryn Johnson, President, US Precision, spearheads programmatic strategy, capabilities and operations across Publicis Media brands. Karyn’s eye for innovation, paired with her depth of experience in the digital, media and ad tech spaces, helps her to lead Publicis Media fearlessly into the future programmatic world on behalf of its clients.
With over 15 years of industry experience, Karyn has led innovative campaigns on strategy, digital and ad tech development teams, continuously expanding her knowledge, qualifications and ambition. In her previous role at Blue 449 as EVP, Managing Director – Digital, Karyn was instrumental in developing strategic relationships with leading media, data and technology companies for the agency. She constantly challenged her clients to think differently, and led Blue 449 client T-Mobile to become one of the most digitally savvy brands in the market.
Andy JohnsonAndy Johnson joined ALC as Chief Data Officer with responsibility for ALC’s data strategy, acquisition and operations. During his 22-year career in the data-driven marketing industry, he has held a variety of marketing, strategic and senior leadership positions with several data services powerhouses. The skills and experience he brings to ALC include managing data strategy to enable data-driven products and advertising solutions that connect data to digital media, creating a unified organization to align all data-owner relationships across platforms, brands and global teams, managing systems process and tools to produce and optimize data assets, and overseeing multi-million-dollar budgets.
Before joining ALC, Andy was most recently SVP of data and audience solutions for Acxiom/LiveRamp. Prior to Acxiom, he spent 16 years at Experian Marketing services in data solutions, acquisition and management roles. He started his data career developing strategic online alliances at Infogroup.
He received his B.S. in business administration/finance from the University of Nebraska-Lincoln. For ten years, he served in the Nebraska National Guard, receiving the Air Force Achievement Medal for distinguished service (three times). He serves on the board for IAB’s Data Center of Excellence and the Board of Advisors for Kammok. Andy is a frequently requested speaker on a broad range of topics at industry roundtables, events and universities.
Norm JohnstonNorm’s career in digital marketing began in 1995 at Modem Media, the agency that placed the first banner ad. He later launched Modem’s first international operation in London, assuming the role of President in 2004. He later joined Mindshare where he eventually became Global Chief Digital Officer, Global Chief Strategy Officer and CEO of FAST, the agency’s search and programmatic specialist division.
In 2018, Norm was named Global CEO of Unruly where he managed a premium video marketplace with 1.2b in worldwide user reach and ten offices around the globe. In 2020, Norm sold the Unruly business to Tremor International, where he is now a non-executive board director.
Norm is currently the Global Head of Advertising Strategy at News Corp, owner of The Times of London and the Wall Street Journal. When it comes to talking about all things digital, Norm’s expertise has been featured by the BBC, MSNBC, Sky News, The Economist, the Financial Times, the New York Times and all major trade publications. His first book, ‘Adaptive Marketing’, was published by Palgrave MacMillan in 2015. He lives in London with his wife and family.
Weyland JungMax KaplanSocial media guy with a craving for the next big thing. When I’m not feverishly scrolling through Twitter, I can be found at the park with my dog, in the cheapest seat at the Knicks game, or burning up at the beach!Matthew KaplanVincent KarachiraDay-to-dayVincent leads the product vision and strategy for Rakuten Marketing, designing the company’s innovative roadmap to keep pace with the swiftly evolving industry. With a team of more than 200 specialists across the business, Vincent oversees Product Operations, Product Management, Product Marketing and Corporate Strategy. Underscoring everything he does is a commitment to making things happen and creating new avenues for growth for both Rakuten Marketing and its clients.
Career historyAn entrepreneur at heart, Vincent has nearly 20 years of experience scaling software businesses through product innovation. Vincent joined Rakuten Marketing as CEO and Founder of Nextperf, the AI-based retargeting business that Rakuten Marketing acquired in 2016. He oversaw the integration of the company’s programmatic assets and laid the foundational platform its Display business is built on today. Prior to NextPerf, Vincent ran IT services and software companies and invested in start-ups across the entertainment, marketing/advertising and retail sectors.
Alma materMIT, Executive Certificate in Management and Leadership, AI, IoT, StrategyInstitute Superieur de Gestion, Master Degree in Business and FinanceFavorite quote“Innovation distinguishes between a leader and a follower” – Steve JobsOf personal noteFather of 3, Vincent has a huge passion for golf.
Anthony KatsurAnthony Katsur is an advertising technology veteran with more than two decades of executive leadership and operational experience at innovative technology companies.
As SVP of Platforms at Nexstar Digital, Anthony is responsible for leading the platform division across Mass², Kixer and Lakana, overseeing the suite of local and national digital marketing products, content monetization solutions and digital services that allow small and mid-sized media publishers and businesses to maximize revenues across every available channel.
He most recently served as President of Sonobi, where he implemented strategy, recruited and led highly effective teams and executed business with leading agencies, brands and media companies. Prior to Sonobi, Anthony held global leadership roles at Rubicon Project, MediaMath, and Maxifier, where he served as CEO. Earlier in his career, he joined DoubleClick via the acquisition of NetGravity and quickly ascended to lead multiple product, operations and engineering divisions.
Anthony is a current Investor and Advisory Board Member of Stackpop and RevCascade, and is a former Advisory Board Member of iSocket (acquired by Rubicon Project).
He is an active participant at industry conferences, speaking about the latest trends in advertising at AdAge’s Brand Summit, Advertising Week, AdMonsters and GABBCON. His thought leadership has been published in AdAge, Adweek, AdExchanger MediaPost, Econsultancy, Digiday and DMN, among others.
Bradley KayBrad is the President/Partner of SS+K â€“ a creative agency with a unique perspective on social engagement. SS+K is partially owned by Creative Artists Agency (CAA).
The firm may be best known as President Obama’s youth marketing agency for its work on both the 2008 and 2012 campaigns, as well as its involvement in the creation and marketing of the yellow wrist band for the Lance Armstrong Foundation.
Since Brad’s return to SS+K 4 years ago, he and his partners have generated year-over-year double-digit growth in revenue and profit and added Fortune 500 clients including GM, Kaplan, Kraft, and Pfizer among others. This momentum was punctuated by a Cannes Gold for Coca-Cola’s Honest Tea and an anointment as Political Agency of the Year by OMMA magazine.
This is Brad’s second tour of duty with the firm. He first joined SS+K in 1994 and stayed through 1998. Since rejoining the firm, Brad’s focus has been on SS+K’s go-to-market strategy, business development, operations, talent acquisition and retention and managing some of the firm’s larger accounts.
Prior to SS+K, Brad was the EVP/Executive Director of Draftcb’s Digital practice and a member of the New York Leadership Team.
Before this, Brad served as the GM and Co-founder of Merkley ID, the Digital and Design unit of Merkley + Partners. Brad also served as Director of Business Development at The Attik, a global digital, design and motion graphics firm working on brands including HBO, MTV and Nike.
Prior to The Attik, he held account management positions at Ogilvy, Cliff Freeman & Partners and Saatchi & Saatchi.
Brad is currently an Agency Advisory Board member to the IAB. He has spoken about the power of social media as a keynote speaker at Brazil’s “Mais” Account Planning Conference and on a panel of independent agencies at the Cannes Festival. He was featured in Departures Magazine as one of the advertising industry’s new Mod Men. He’s been a judge for the Effie’s, led panels for IAB and been a guest columnist for Adweek, MediaPost and The Hub.
Learn more here: http://about.me/bradleykayJames KelmInternet and mobile executive with over twelve years of experience, including general management, product development, business development, business operations, and strategy.
Hee Kyu KimHee Kyu Kim is an SVP, Digital Media lead, within the Customer Investment and Engagement team at Bank of America. Responsibilities include overseeing all paid digital activation across Display and Social channels for every line of business within Bank of America and Merrill.
Hee Kyu joined Bank of America in 2009, as a VP Digital Media overseeing multiple lines of businesses. Previous to joining BofA, she worked 10+ years within various advertising agencies in Boston.
Hee Kyu received her Bachelor of Science in Business Administration at the University of Vermont.
Hee Kyu resides in Boston, MA and is an active member of BIMA/MITX as well as Boston AdClub.
Joyce King-ThomasJoyce King Thomas is Chairman, Chief Creative Officer of McCannXBC, a unit focused on leading MasterCard’s global marketing efforts. She has is one of the originators of MasterCard’s priceless campaign, which runs in 100 countries and has been spoofed by everyone from Ralph Nader to Bart Simpson.
During a two-year hiatus from McCann, Joyce became a partner at Longreads, at twitter fueled social reading site. She also became a board member of the Nurse Family Partnership, a group dedicated to teaching parenting skills to young mothers living in poverty.
She has won numerous awards and served as a judge for Cannes, the One Show and the Clios. Advertising Age named Joyce one of the 100 most influential women in advertising.
Pauline KlimenkoRob KlippelRob Klippel is Senior Vice President of Advertising Products and Strategy at Spectrum Reach, the advertising sales division of Charter Communication. He oversees data platforms including insights strategy and attribution, and is responsible for advanced advertising platforms including streaming, video on demand, and digital and cross-platform addressable products.
Mr. Klippel joined Charter from Comcast where he was Vice President of Advanced Platforms, developing dynamic ad insertion on VOD and addressable platforms and prior to that he was Vice President of New Products, and of Engineering and Operations. He also served in leadership roles in customer care and operations at Adelphia, Relera and Verio. Early in his career Mr. Klippel held management consulting roles at Deloitte and Accenture.
He holds a B.S. in engineering from the University of Illinois, and an MBA in marketing and operations from the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University.
Mark KoperaMark Kopera leads the Moat Analytics Product organization at Oracle Data Cloud. Part of the Oracle Data Cloud, Moat makes brand advertising more effective by delivering software to measure and optimize media against viewability and attention, brand safety, invalid traffic, and quality.
Prior to Moat, Mark held ad tech leadership positions at Rocket Fuel, [x+1], appssavvy, and Digitas. He also advised media, retail and consumer goods companies and investors as a part of OC&C Strategy Consultants. Mark holds Bachelors and Masters degrees from Cornell University’s College of Engineering and lives in New York City.
Craig KostelicCraig Kostelic is chief business officer, revenue at Condé Nast, heading up all advertising sales across the Condé Nast portfolio.
Kostelic most recently served as the chief business officer of The Lifestyle Collection, including The Food Innovation Group (Bon Appétit and Epicurious), Architectural Digest, Condé Nast Traveler and SELF, overseeing all revenue and brand development for the collection of brands.
Previously, Kostelic served as head of revenue and head of digital for The Food Innovation Group. Under his sales and digital leadership, The Food Innovation Group hit record highs in terms of revenue, profitability and digital audience growth. Prior to his role at the Food Innovation Group, Kostelic also served as digital advertising director at Condé Nast Traveler, where he was responsible for all digital revenue streams and oversaw the launch of CNTraveler.com.
Before joining Conde Nast, Kostelic worked at Google where he was responsible for developing and managing national strategic sales for Mobile Display within the automotive vertical. Prior to Google, Craig held numerous sales and marketing roles at Microsoft and Johnson & Johnson.
Katie KulikKatie Kulik is Executive Vice President, Global Digital Sales at ViacomCBS.
Prior to becoming EVP, Global Digital Sales, Kulik was the Global Senior Vice President of Sales and Marketing for CBS Interactive’s Tech, Games, Lifestyle and Business groups. For the renowned brands CNET, GameSpot, Chow, Last.fm and others, Kulik leads global revenue and product marketing and directs agency and client media strategy and implementation. A veteran sales and marketing executive, Kulik is an expert in premium digital media and understands how to connect brands with customers anywhere.
In her role as Global Senior Vice President Kulik directed a worldwide team of more than 100 sales and product-marketing professionals dedicated to building major campaigns for brands across CBSi’s ecosystem of screens, from online to mobile and social platforms. Kulik has designed innovative marketing programs for nearly every major technology and CE brand, as well as major auto, CPG, and retail industries.
Kulik’s other expertise lies in change management, helping sales and marketing teams rapidly adjust to – and embrace – the ever-changing digital landscape and the resulting implications on consumer buying habits.
Prior to joining CBS Interactive she was in ad sales with the Motley Fool.
She earned a bachelors degree in Economics and Psychology from Lake Forest College and lives with her husband and daughters in Tiburon, CA.
Alexandra LamAlexandra Lam has over ten years of experience in a variety of roles within the digital media landscape. She has provided guidance and support to industries ranging from media production to hospitality.
Chris LaSalaWith a decade of experience Chris LaSala is a seasoned veteran in the digital media space. Chris currently heads Google’s mobile publisher business development efforts where he works with established media brands as well as the emerging mobile application developer community. Prior to this role, Chris held roles leading a channel program aimed at delivering Google’s advertising solutions to local business and leading Google’s North American advertising agency strategy.
Prior to joining Google, Chris held the roles of director of business development at Looksmart where he was responsible for developing partnerships for the distribution of LookSmart’s advertising and search solutions, and strategy development consultant at Strategic Decisions Group, where he advised clients in the oil and gas and technology industries on making multi-billion dollar investments. Chris began his career as a public accountant for five years at Coopers & Lybrand. Chris holds a bachelor of science from Boston College and an MBA from Duke University.
Mike LawMike Law is currently Executive Vice President, Managing Director, Video Investment for Dentsu Aegis Network. In this role, Mike oversees TV and Digital video strategy and investments across the agencies clients as well as leading greater convergence internally at the agency and advancing the adoption of new, advanced advertising platforms. Mike oversees more than $4B in annual video spending across many clients including Microsoft, GM, Home Depot, Pfizer, Macy’s, Reckitt Benckiser, MasterCard, Staples, Sony, Dannon, Outback, Disney and Diageo.
Formerly, Mike was Director of Media Strategy and TV Investments for Pfizer where he handled consumer media strategy for their DTC brands as well as managing the portfolios $600MM+ TV and digital video investments. Previously, Mike was a Media Buyer at Carat and Arnold.
Nick LawAs Global Chief Creative Officer, Nick is responsible for the creative vision of R/GA, the New York-based agency for the digital age. He guides teams of visual designers, copywriters and experience designers as they create award-winning work for a many of Fortune 500 companies. He also ensures that R/GA stays true to the company’s unique legacy of collaboration between world-class creative and groundbreaking technology.
Nick’s background is extensive and diverse, spanning multiple marketing disciplines during 20 years at agencies in the United States and abroad. He began his career in branding and corporate identity and design before switching to advertising, and then ultimately, focusing on digital marketing.
Nick has won every major industry awards, including a Titanium Lion and Grand Prix Cyber Lion at Cannes, and a prestigious Black Pencil from D&AD. Three times he has been named in Creativity Magazine’s “Creativity 50”, a list of the world’s most influential creatives.
Edward LeahyEd Leahy is the Senior Director of data sales and solutions for Lotame, a global marketing technology company that through its leading Data Management Platform (DMP), helps publishers, advertisers and agencies navigate the growing challenge around managing audience data. Ed joined Lotame in 2016 to spearhead data solutions sales efforts across North American agencies and trading desks. Prior to joining Lotame, Ed held positions in business development at iBehavior (KBM Group) and Mariah Media Network. He started his advertising career on the agency side of the business, working for WPP’s GroupM in several client facing roles.
Daryl LeeDaryl Lee is the Global CEO of IPG Mediabrands, the media and marketing solutions division of Interpublic Group (NYSE: IPG), made up of the network’s best-in-class global media agencies UM and Initiative, and a portfolio of innovative marketing specialist companies, namely Reprise, Magna, Orion, Rapport, Healix, Mediabrands Content Studio and the IPG Media Lab. In his role, Lee is responsible for the strategic and commercial leadership and performance of the Mediabrands global network.
Lee has held a series of roles with increasing responsibility at IPG. Most recently, he was the global CEO of UM, revolutionizing the agency into an award-winning global powerhouse with a roster of iconic and fast-growing clients. Relentlessly client focused, Lee fostered a culture at UM that believes “Better Science and Better Art delivers Better Outcomes.” His inclusive leadership style fueled UM’s momentum, resulting in countless new and expanded client relationships with globally recognized brands including American Express, BMW, Coca-Cola, Johnson & Johnson, Sony and Spotify.
Lee’s strategic vision positioned UM at the forefront of media transformation, attaining industry leader status on Forrester’s first-ever Wave report on the media agency landscape in 2018. Lee originally joined UM in 2006, as the Head of Global Strategy. During that time, he built the Communications Planning Practice across global clients including Coca-Cola, Johnson & Johnson, MasterCard, Microsoft and Sony. He then joined McCann Worldgroup as Chief Integration Architect, eventually becoming Global Chief Strategy Officer responsible for working across all McCann offices to ensure clients received integrated brand solutions customized to their business challenges. In 2013, Lee returned to UM in the role of Global CEO.
Prior to IPG, Lee spent six years at Ogilvy, where he was Group Director of the Marketing Strategy Group and the 360 Strategy Director for the global IBM account. Lee began his career as a consultant for McKinsey & Company in the New York office.
Lee’s career is driven by his passion for marketing, endless curiosity, respect for the power of storytelling and commitment to positive social change. He is a vocal champion for diversity, equity and inclusion in the world and the workplace. He currently sits on the board of the economic empowerment non-profit STRIVE and is a former board member of the Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation (GLAAD). Daryl is also on the Board of Directors of Effie Worldwide, sits on the Facebook Client Council and Twitter Influence Council and has been a juror for multiple awards including the inaugural Creative Effectiveness Cannes Lions.
Daryl graduated with a D. Phil from the University of Oxford, which he attended as a Rhodes Scholar, and in 2016 was named Executive of the Year by AdWeek and was honored by Advertising Age as a Media Maven for 2015.
Russell LeFevreRich LeFurgyRich LeFurgy has been a board member, advisor or investor in over 55 online advertising companies, drawing from over a 30 year career in advertising. LeFurgy was Founding Chairman of the IAB and sfBIG, a Venture Capitalist (WaldenVC), head of ad sales at Starwave (ESPN.com) and the Walt Disney Internet Group. Prior to Starwave, LeFurgy had a 17 year career at traditional ad agency NWAyer in New York, working on clients AT&T, Proctor & Gamble, Avon, Gillette and Dupont, among others.
He started online advertising business accelerator Archer in 2004, helping early stage online advertising companies reach takeoff velocity with strategic advisory services in fundraising, trade marketing and sales. LeFurgy received ad:tech’s Industry Achievement Award (2008), the IAB’s Lifetime Achievement Award (2004), was inducted into Advertising Age’s Interactive Hall of Fame (2000). He was recognized by USA Today as the “Johnny Appleseed of online advertising”.
LeFurgy has served on company boards as a director, including Blue Lithium and Associated Content (both sold to Yahoo!) and Web Clients (sold to ValueClick), and is currently on the board of Placecast. He has also provided advisory services to large and small online advertising companies (Google, AOL, Blue Lithium, Glam, and Placecast) and has personally invested in a number of promising online advertising startups, such as Klout, Ad Relevance (sold to Nielsen NetRatings), Grouper/Crackle (sold to Sony) and Blue Lithium (sold to Yahoo!), among others.
Tyler LettichTyler joins IAB from Adweek where he served as Director, Programming and Events where he led the event and programming team strategy, including oversight of topic ideation, speaker recruitment, moderator preparation for more than 40+ events. Tyler started his career at Argyle producing 1-day CMO Forums and later moved to the Innovative Enterprise business when the company tripled its size through acquisitions. At Innovation Enterprise, he developed large scale 2-day multi-themed programs for marketing, advertising, and media executives. Tyler has a passion for marketing, advertising, and media. For Tyler, there’s nothing more exciting than pitching a potential speaker and getting the win! He has a passion for creating programs and delivering enticing and relevant content for audiences. Tyler earned his B.A. in Communications and Public Relations from William Paterson University.
Helen LinA catalyst of innovation, a pioneer in programmatic, a collaborative industry partner, and fierce champion for diversity and inclusion, Helen Lin is Chief Digital Officer for Publicis Media.
Helen oversees digital strategy, partnerships, investment and negotiations on behalf of Publicis globally, represents the Groupe in industry-leading initiatives including improving digital brand safety standards and the overall safety on today’s largest consumer platforms. Helen enables our clients including Disney, Verizon, Kellogg’s, Lowes, Coty, GSK, and many others, to remain at the forefront of the rapidly, evolving digital ecosystem.
Helen’s professional focus goes beyond client & agency work. She is the founding Executive Sponsor of Publicis Media’s Women’s Business Resource Group POW! (Power of Women!), and on the board of Asians in ADCOLOR. She is also an active board member for Partnership with Children, a non-profit that helps over 10,000 NYC school children overcome the stresses of growing up in poverty. Helen earned her bachelor’s degree at UCLA and her MBA at NYU Stern.
James LinneyJohn LiskoAdam LowyKris MagelKristian (Kris) Magel serves as President, DAN Media Clients for Dentsu Aegis.
A veteran with nearly two decades of experience in the media business, Kris has proven himself a formidable negotiator who has earned the respect of media partners for both his analytical approach to the marketplace and his passionate representation of clients. His reputation for articulate, informed intelligence also makes him a favorite with the press and a popular panelist at industry events. In 2012 Magel was named to the Adweek 50 (#16) as one of the industry’s most influential executives and was a Mediaweek ‘Media All-Star’ in 2007. Magel also has an influential voice within the video industry, serving as a co-chair of the Ad Council Broadcast TV Committee, a member of the advisory boards of industry collective Videonomics and Advertiser Perceptions and a board member of the New York Advertising Club.
Kris received his Bachelors of Arts degree from the John Wiley School of Business at the State University of New York at Geneseo. He makes his home with his family in New York City and East Hampton, New York.
Jean-Philippe (JP) MaheuJean-Philippe (JP) Maheu is the VP of US Client Services at Twitter, where he leads Twitter’s relationships with its top marketers and manages a team of industry & regional leaders. Prior to this role, JP launched the Global Brands team at Twitter and led the global expansion of Twitter Brand Strategy and Agency Development teams.
Maheu joined Twitter in 2013 through the acquisition of SocialTV analytics company Bluefin Labs, where he was CEO. Under JP’s leadership, Bluefin achieved remarkable sales traction with leading brands and strengthened its market leading position.
Prior to Bluefin Labs, JP served as the Global CEO of Publicis Modem, the digital marketing unit of Publicis Worldwide. Maheu also held positions as both the Chief Digital Officer of Ogilvy & Mather, where he was responsible for digital growth and innovation across the company’s operating units, and CEO of Razorfish, where he led the vision, strategy and growth of the company.
JP holds a MBA from J.L. Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University and a M.S. in Network & Computer Sciences from Pierre et Marie Curie University in Paris, France. He sits on the boards of the IAB, the Mobile Marketing Association, and the NY Chapter of The Nature Conservancy, and lives in NYC with his wife and two children.
Jason MaltbyJason began his career in 1988 buying media for political campaigns. He joined DMB&B in 1989working on accounts such as GM, Kraft general Foods and P&G. Jason joined Ogilvy & Mather in 1993 asAssociate Media Director, working on Hershey, Ryder, Mattel, Duracell, and Sandoz Pharmaceutical(later Novartis Consumer Health Group). He soon rose to Group Director, National Broadcast at Ogilvy,and was named President, Managing Director in 2000 with Mindshare’s launch in the US.
In 2002, Jason was named Media Buyer of the Year by Electronic Media. In 2005, Jason was named aMedia All-Star for National TV/Cable by AdWeek magazine. Jason has also served as Chairperson of the4A’s National Audio/Video committee.
Jason graduated from Gettysburg College (Pennsylvania) with a B.A. in English Literature, and washonored by Gettysburg with the Young Alumni Career Achievement Award in 2003. He lives in Chatham,New Jersey with his wife, Betsy, and their three children, Sean, Megan, and James. He is an avid readerand enjoys fishing, hiking and travel.
Jake MarxRob MasterRob Master is Vice President of Media and Digital Engagement for North America at Unilever. He oversees a team responsible for media innovation, strategy and the development of integrated communication plans for all Unilever brands. Under Rob’s leadership Unilever has been recognized as Digital Marketer of the Year by Advertising Age, Media Client of the Year by Media Post and one of Fast Company’s Most Innovative Marketers.
Rob joined Unilever in 2002 as a brand marketer, managing a number of the company’s iconic brands, including Dove and Axe, and driving award-winning branding campaigns.
Prior to joining Unilever, Rob worked in brand marketing for PepsiCo’s Taco Bell and for various communication agencies, as well as two start-ups.
He holds a B.A. in political science from the University of Wisconsin at Madison and an M.B.A. from the Olin School of Business at Washington University in St. Louis.
Ai MatsubaraMs. Ai Matsubara works closely with Yahoo! JAPAN’s executive management team to optimize business strategy. Prior to becoming a board of director of IAB Tech Lab, over 10 years of Video Ads product development experience with progressively increasing leadership responsibility through Vice President in Yahoo! JAPAN.
Brian MatthewsBrian Matthews leads the national advertising sales team for the NFL Media group. He oversees the ad sales responsibilities for the NFL Network, NFL RedZone and the NFL Digital portfolio.
Prior to joining the NFL, Matthews was the Senior Vice President of national sales for the NBC News Digital Group. He previously served as the Vice President for the NBC Entertainment team delivering innovative advertising solutions across digital properties such as NBC, Bravo, Oxygen, USA and Syfy. Before joining NBC, Matthews led East Coast sales for the BBC America cable network and the BBC digital properties where he helped create the first BBC sales team in the U.S. marketplace. He also spent seven years at Turner Broadcasting representing CNN Digital, and began his sales career at Scripps Interactive.
Matthews is a graduate of St. Bonaventure University and resides in Chatham, New Jersey with his wife and four children.
Mainak MazumdarMainak is a Data Science executive with 20+ years experience in consumer, media, and marketing tech. As the Chief Data and Research Officer of Nielsen Company, Mainak leads the Data Science, Identity Solutions and AI initiatives. He is responsible for developing audience measurement methodologies and product development. Mainak is passionate about scaling businesses with AI, developing talent and delivering results. Prior to Nielsen, Mainak held Data Science leadership roles with GfK, Simulmedia, and Google (DoubleClick).
He completed his masters and doctoral studies from Brown University. Mainak is a member of the General Assembly’s Data Science Standard Board and a steering committee member of the University of Chicago Booth Business School’s Kilts Center of Marketing.
Jodie McAfeeJodie McAfee is Senior Vice President, Sales & Marketing at Inscape, a leading provider of automatic content recognition (ACR) technologies and comprehensive cross-screen metrics for broadcasters and advertisers.
A media and marketing veteran, Jodie has led the strategic execution for advanced video advertising, interactive TV and content acquisition initiatives for more than two decades.
Prior to Inscape, Jodie was General Manager at Samsung AdHub, where he led the development and introduction of Samsung’s multi-screen advertising platform across US and European markets, while overseeing many of Samsung’s partnerships with major agencies and Fortune 500 brands both domestically and internationally.
Previous to Samsung, Jodie was involved in the creation and operation of multiple emerging companies with expertise in connected TV, iTV and advanced advertising. Jodie resides in Brooklyn, is a graduate of The University of Texas and earned a Juris Doctor degree in Entertainment Law from Whittier University.
Ryan McConvilleKirk McDonaldOne of the “50 vital leaders in tech, media and marketing,” according to Adweek, Kirk is the CEO of GroupM North America (NA) where he leads 6,500 people passionate about shaping the next era of media where advertising works better for people. A member of GroupM’s Global Leadership Team, he is a key player in championing GroupM’s strategy to work with agency and GroupM leadership in the region to use its scale in providing more powerful and effective solutions for clients through the development of technology-enabled services.
With $17.6 billion in media investment billings across the U.S. and Canada, GroupM owns a 22% market share in the world’s largest region. Kirk is particularly driven to help GroupM lead the way in driving real change across the industry to find a new balance of making advertising less interruptive and a valued part of the media experience. He also believes that, as the desire for brands to play their part in leading the way toward real change grows stronger, GroupM is the one to help clients be authentic and bold in this moment. Kirk served as the Global CEO of Choreograph, and was responsible for launching WPP’s global data company which brought together over 700 technologists, product developers, and data scientists. Kirk and Choreograph focused on helping marketers and brands realize the value of their first party data in the fast-changing data landscape.
Kirk joined GroupM from WarnerMedia’s Xandr where he most recently served as Chief Business Officer in charge of the go to market functions including sales, communications, product marketing, and marketing strategy and execution after holding the role of Chief Marketing Officer for nearly two years. Prior to AT&T, Kirk was President of PubMatic, the marketing automation software company, and held roles with Time Inc., Fortune|Money Group and CNET Networks, among others.
Throughout his career, Kirk received many accolades including being named to Ebony Magazine’s Power 100 list in 2018, Adweek’s 2014 “12 Stars of Ad Tech Who are Building the Future of the Industry Right Now’ list and Business Insider’s 2014 “The 46 Most Important African-Americans in Technology” list, among others. Kirk is a founding member of the Black Executive CMO Alliance (BECA). He currently serves on the Board of Directors for Elanco (NYSE: ELAN), and is a member of the prestigious Executive Leadership Council. Healso serves on several other professional and not-for-profit boards including the Ad Council, Advertising Week Advisory Council, and is the co-chair of MOUSE/CI.
Kevin McGurnKevin McGurn is Vevo’s Chief Sales Officer. He joins Vevo from Fullscreen, where he served as Head of Sales for the company as well as Otter Media properties including Crunchyroll, Roster Teeth SoompiTV and VRV. Prior to Fullscreen, Kevin was Chief Revenue Officer of Shazam. He previously served as Senior Vice President of Sales at Hulu for nearly seven years, where he grew the sales team from zero to half a billion dollars in advertising revenue. Kevin has also held prior senior roles at NBC Universal and DoubleClick.
Adam McKinneyAdam is SVP – Associate General Counsel for Xandr where he provides legal guidance on technology, product, data, and privacy issues. In his current role, he advises Xandr on the responsible collection and use of data to make advertising matter. Prior to joining Xandr, AT&T’s advertising company, in 2018, Adam was the lead attorney at AT&T for privacy and data protection issues, as well as AT&T’s data analytics unit. Over a 20 year career at AT&T, he has held a wide variety of roles at AT&T, many of them focused on product and data issues. He has a BBA in Management Science from Southern Methodist University and his JD from Baylor University. He offices in New York City.
Noel McMichaelNoel McMichael is Vice President for Strategic Initiatives and Public Sector at LiveRamp (NYSE: RAMP), the leading connectivity platform for the safe and effective use of data.
Responsible for delivering growth in new market verticals that are making investments in identity resolution strategy, he also oversees strategy for public policy initiatives and helps to ensure LiveRamp solutions are interoperable and compliant with evolving industry regulations and privacy laws. An innovator and product evangelist for over 20 years, McMichael has had an illustrious career in the digital marketing industry, having worked with hundreds of the world’s leading brands and startups to bridge the gap between technology and business.
Before joining LiveRamp, McMichael was Vice President of Product at Acxiom, a leader in identity and customer data management, where he played an instrumental role in the company’s acquisition of LiveRamp and soon after, the formation of the Advertising ID Consortium. His extensive industry experience also includes founding two startups – real-time analytics and demand-side platform Adgile and SEO/SEM company Marketleap. He was also a part of the leadership team at Right Media, the world’s first ad exchange and a pioneer of programmatic media. McMichael has been awarded two patents over the course of his professional tenure, most recently for developing a method to analyze website visitors using anonymized behavioral prediction models.
Throughout his expansive career, McMichael has maintained a passion for mentorship. He currently sits on the board of the IAB Data Center of Excellence and Advertising ID Consortium and was a co-founding board member of the Search Engine Marketers Professional Organization (SEMPO). He holds a bachelor’s degree in political science and international studies from the University of Texas at Arlington.
Maggie MeadeMaggie co-founded Sibling Rivalry in 2011 with partners Joe Wright and Mikon van Gastel. Creating a hybrid company that at its core is based in design and storytelling for brands and networks. Maggie oversees all the sales and operations of the company.
Maggie comes from a career as an Executive Producer from awarded companies such as @radical media and Droga5. While at Droga5, she produced and branded various award-winning multimedia projects, including the “Tap Project,” where she won the first Titanium Lion at the Cannes International Advertising Festival.
Maggie rarely has down time and prefers to have a full social calendar at all times, as people give her energy. She resides in downtown NYC with her husband and daughter.
David MooreNigel MorrisNigel Morris was appointed CEO of Aegis Media Americas in 2011 having held the position of CEO, Aegis Media North America from May 2009. In June 2012 Nigel was additionally appointed CEO of Aegis Media EMEA. From 2003 until 2009, Nigel was the founder CEO of Isobar, and led its rapid expansion into the world’s leading digital services agency network. Prior to this Nigel held a range of senior positions in Carat International. He joined Aegis Media in 1992 having previously worked in fashion, corporate identity and branding consultancy. Nigel is also Chairman of the Aegis Group plc Sustainability Committee and leads the future product offering and service delivery strategy for Aegis Media.
Alan MossAlan Moss is Vice President, Global Advertising Sales at Amazon. His efforts are focused on helping businesses around the world engage customers and build their brands.
Prior to Amazon, Alan spent 13 years at Google, where he most recently served as Vice President of Professional Services supporting advertisers and publishers globally. Other roles included leading Google’s largest U.S. customer sales sector, as well as its Americas mid-market sales organization.
Alan has also held leadership positions at other technology and internet-based companies, including PayPal, ChartOne, Inc., GoTo Shopping (acquired by Yahoo!), CareTools, Wang Laboratories, Microsoft, and LEK Consulting.
Alan earned a bachelor’s degree from Dartmouth College and an MBA from Harvard Business School. He lives in the Bay Area with his wife, Kirsten, and their son and two daughters.
Matt MurphyMatt Murphy is partner and Group Creative Director at 72andSunny, where he helps lead the company’s commitment to experimentation with art, technology, and entertainment.
During his five and half years at 72andSunny, he’s worked across many brands, including the iconic collaboration between K-Swiss and Kenny Powers of HBO’s “Eastbound and Down” to create “Kenny Powers, MFCEO” as well as creating the fully integrated launch campaign for Call of Duty: Black Ops 2.
He currently leads the creative charge on all things Google, including the relaunch of the Google’s Search App which invited New Yorkers to rediscover their city through bespoke OOH placements all throughout the city; YouTube’s Proud to Play film, which celebrated equality in sports during the World Cup; and the recent Made With Code: Holiday Lights project, which gave Google’s initiative to get teenage girls into coding a national stage at the White House Christmas Tree Lighting Ceremony.
Prior to 72andSunny, Matt spent three years at Wieden+Kennedy in Portland working on Nike and EA.
John MuszynskiA 30-plus year veteran and legend in the media world, John Muszynski is the Chief Investment Officer at Spark, and leads all negotiating on behalf of our client’s brands in order to deliver media savings and the best pricing in the marketplace. Not only does John oversee the buying team for Spark, he also leads the Starcom MediaVest Group Exchange (which we call SMGx). John’s SMGx team helps our entire network drive innovation in advanced media and technology while gathering marketplace intelligence across SMG’s $16 Billion in media spending.
Prior to joining Spark and SMGx, John served as CEO of Starcom USA (2005 – 2009), helping build a company at the forefront of leveraging media partnerships to strengthen the brands of some of the world’s biggest marketers. Under his leadership, Starcom was named Ad Age Agency of the Year (2006-07), Media magazine Media Agency of the Year (2005-07) – and was the first media agency to ever make Ad Age’s A List (2007).
John has received numerous honors for his work in the industry, including Advertising Age’s Media Maven, TV Week’s Buyer of the Year as well as a Mediaweek All-Star, min’s Most Intriguing People in Media and Kidscreen Golden Marble Award for Best Media Director. Most recently, John was inducted into the Broadcasting & Cable Hall of Fame, securing his status as an industry icon.
Kunal NagpalKunal Nagpal serves as the GM – Publisher Platforms for InMobi driving both revenue and product strategy for InMobi’s publishing business and premium media exchange. Before that, Kunal was Vice President of Client Services at InMobi, where he oversaw account management for thousands of advertiser clients. Prior to InMobi, Kunal spent a number of years at McKinsey and Co., where he worked with Fortune 500 clients on cross-regional board-level strategy, operations and risk discussions for the U.S., Europe and Australia regionsHannah NardoneHannah joined the IAB in November of 2018. She serves as a Member Services Manager with a focus in post-sales. Hannah is an alumna of Villanova University and holds a Bachelor’s degree in Economics and Classical Studies.
Peter NaylorPeter Naylor is Vice President of Americas at Snap, responsible for driving the growth of the company’s advertising business across the United States, Canada and Mexico. Previously, Peter served as SVP and Head of Advertising Sales at Hulu, where he worked for over six years. Prior to Hulu, Peter was EVP of Digital Media Sales for NBCUniversal (NBCU) where he ran digital advertising sales for NBCU’s entertainment, news and sports digital properties. Before NBCU, Peter served as the SVP of Sales for the iVillage Properties, which was acquired by NBCU in May 2006. Prior to joining iVillage, he served as Vice President of Sales for Terra Lycos. He started his internet sales career at Wired Digital. He serves on the Board of Directors for the IAB, the IRTS Foundation and the TD Foundation, an not-for-profit organization that provides aid to children of wounded warriors.
Goksu Nebol-PerlmanDiana NegronKristoffer NelsonKristoffer Nelson is the COO and Director of SRAX and principal for BIGtoken. As a founding team member, Kristoffer has been pivotal in growing SRAX into a multinational digital marketing and data management platform company listed on Nasdaq.
With over 15 years of technology and creative business experience, Kristoffer has been a guest speaker for Loyola Marymount University among other academic institutions, the National Association of Broadcasters, the IAB and numerous other professional and media organizations. Kristoffer is also a frequent contributor to many publications in advertising, blockchain, and crypto news and information.
Derek NicolJohn NittiJohn Nitti joined Zenith in 2009. His goal was to build ZenithInteractive, the full-service digital media arm of the agency, from the ground up. In less than a year, John brought in more than 50 new hires and 10 new clients—increasing digital billings from $3MM to $180MM.
Since then, John’s leadership has continued to change and grow the agency. In 2010 the Digital and Magazine divisions were merged to offer clients a more robust, content-centric approach to media. Two years later, John was promoted to the newly created position of President of Activation, where he was charged with trading, investment, execution, and activation for all Zenith craftskills. In that capacity, John formed the National Video group in 2012 to bring together linear, digital, and mobile video. The latest implementation, in 2013, was the full integration of all aspects of Local Activation (Broadcast, Print, OOH, and Digital).
That same year also saw the creation of the Activation Standards, Insights and Technology group to complete John’s reimagining of Zenith Activation. With the creation of this group, Zenith is now structured to implement buying standards and strategic partnerships and technology platforms that apply to all genres of media and across all of its clients. This group, driven by John’s vision, helps continue to put Zenith in an industry leading position of driving the marketplace for fluidity and ensures Zenith is a respected leader in the measurement, programmatic and technology space.
John’s vision for the Zenith Activation group has brought about tremendous impact for the agency. His Activation Team now includes over 300 staff members across North America and manages clients’ media investments of over $10B (2013). John is the architect of Zenith’s fluid video approach for reaching consumers across multiple screens. He has also been a guiding force in the creation of strategic partnerships that drive cross-platform innovation and measurement.
Fueled by a drive for innovation and a desire to evolve the media marketplace, John was promoted to Chief Investment Officer of Zenith in September of 2014. In this position, John will continue his oversight of the Zenith Activation teams while adding many key initiatives for Publics Groupe and the ZO Agency Network (Zenith, Optimedia, Moxie and Performics) to his remit.
Prior to joining Zenith, John was Director of U.S. Media & Sponsorships at American Express for six years, where he was responsible for developing and overseeing traditional and digital media planning and strategy efforts across various business areas for the company.
In addition to his work at Zenith and American Express, John has held posts at Young & Rubicam, Time Inc. and Dentsu. He has over 16 years of experience in media planning, buying, and sales.
John holds a Bachelor of Science in marketing and finance from Wagner College. He resides on Staten Island, New York, with his wife Noelle and their two sons.
Kim NorrisKim Norris is a senior cable advertising and media executive with over 20 years of experience in general management leading sales, strategy and new ad technology products and data solutions for multiple cable operators. As Group Vice President, Digital & Advanced Advertising Sales, Kim is responsible for leading the sales teams in the Northeast and a robust enterprise wide digital business. An industry thought leader and innovator; Norris has established a record of success running both traditional media sales and incubating and deploying transformative new advertising products at the convergence of media, technology and data.
Prior to Joining Spectrum Reach, Norris was Chief Operating Officer for Viamedia and worked with the company’s 60 MVPD partners across the US on both traditional and OTT and mobile streaming and programmatic advertising monetization with local, regional and national advertisers in 70 DMA’s across the country. While at Viamedia, she successfully launched an addressable platform with Google Fiber in Kansas City and led the company’s programmatic TV platform placemedia.
Previously, Norris held senior sales and product roles at both Comcast and Cablevision. As EVP of Emerging Business & Data Analytics at Cablevision, Norris drove the advanced advertising product roadmap and commercial strategy for set top box data and addressable and interactive television advertising that established Cablevision as an advertising industry leader and innovator. At Comcast she was a Division Vice President for the Northeast television markets following Comcast’s acquisition of ATT Cable. Norris also served as the founding President of the DPAA (Digital Place-based Advertising Association) in the digital out-of-home advertising industry.
Norris has served on advisory committees for television and digital industry groups and several technology companies. Multichannel News and Women in Cable Telecommunications (WICT) named her a “Wonder Woman” in 2013. She is a Cynopsis 2016 ‘Top Women in Digital” and has been recognized by Cablefax as a “Top Woman in Cabletech” 2011-2016 and is a WICT Betsey Magness Fellow. In 2010, she received the “Most Significant Product or Platform” award from ITVT for leadership in interactive and multiplatform television.
Janet NorthenJanet was one of the first to apply strategic corporate communications to build agency brands. She was The Martin Agency’s first director of agency communications and held the same post later at Fallon and again in 1999 when she joined McKinney. Her work has earned international media for the agency’s talked-about work in the marketplace. In 2009, Janet inspired the formation of the Interactive Advertising Bureau’s Agency Advisory Board that serves as the voice of creativity to its publisher members. She has chaired the 4A’s Agency Communications Committee and is on the board of the UNC School of Journalism and Mass Communication.
Dale OlderDale has served as the Chief Product Officer for Integral Ad Science since 2018, bringing 20 years of product and technology experience to the role. As head of product, Dale sets the strategic direction and roadmap for IAS’ market-leading suite of measurement, verification, and optimization solutions.
Dale has held a variety of roles in engineering, corporate development, and product. Dale joined Integral from AOL Advertising where he was VP of audience data products. Prior to that, he led product development and M&A for AOL’s mobile advertising business. Dale spent his early career in consulting as an engineer for CGI Group, followed by Discovery Communications where he managed programs to transform Discovery’s digital media and advertising technology.
Dale holds a BS in Information Systems from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
Michael PalmerMichael Palmer is originally from a small town in upstate New York. As an undergraduate at Vassar College he majored in history and political science and holds advanced degrees from Cornell, Harvard and the Stern School of Business. Prior to settling into a career in software development, Michael had previously worked a wide variety of jobs, including being a college lecturer, a wilderness guide and a factory shift manager. After working for several years as a software product manager for a clinical trial software, Michael helped found a small business intelligence company, where he ran operations. After selling and successfully exiting this company, Michael joined GroupM via Xaxis where he has worked for the last five years in several technology-related roles. He is currently GroupM’s global Vice President for Emerging Technologies.
Nicolle PangisAs Ampersand CEO, Nicolle Pangis and her team are working to build a smarter, more effective television ecosystem by empowering brands to seamlessly connect with audiences wherever and whenever they watch TV. Pangis previously served as Global COO at GroupM’s [m]PLATFORM where she led global product management, strategic partnerships and technology development across the largest media investment management organization in the world. Prior to [m]PLATFORM, Pangis was a central figure in the success of pioneering programmatic advertising company, Xaxis, serving first as Global Chief Revenue Officer, followed by Global COO. Earlier, she was President of 24/7 Real Media where she led the company’s business in North America and Europe. Nicolle is a member of the Ad Council Board of Directors and has been named to the Adweek 50 list, AdAge’s 40 Under 40, Crain’s 40 Under 40, and Multichannel News’ Women to Watch. She was recently awarded AdExchanger’s 2020 Leadership in Advertising award. She received her bachelor’s degree in communication from Boston University and her MBA from Rutgers University.
Todd ParsonsTodd Parsons is the Chief Product Officer at OpenX, where he leads a global team and is responsible for planning, implementation and go-to-market strategy across the company’s entire portfolio of products including display, mobile app and video. In his position, Todd focuses on creating advertising products at the intersection of consumer identity and data, and positioning OpenX to build programmatic solutions that allow publishers and brands to capitalize on the massive shifts in consumer behavior, regulation, and advertising itself.
Prior to OpenX, Todd was responsible for leading all product at SocialCode, across social, mobile, video and more. Todd also previously worked at Acxiom, leading product for the company’s core $330 million Marketing Services business, and founded two venture-backed startups; Aditive, acquired by Acxiom in 2014, and BuzzLogic, the first Saas platform for social media analytics and advertising.
John PatroulisJohn’s career began as a copywriter in New York City at TBWA\Chiat\Day, NY, where he created campaigns for a diverse roster of clients, including Nextel, Absolut, Samsonite, and Bic. With efforts that included multiple awardwinning television campaigns, and such nontraditional work as a limited edition fashion collector’s piece for Absolut and a billboard that blistered and faded for the Skin Cancer Foundation, his work received some of the highest creative honors in the industry.
In 2004, John moved west and joined the TBWA/Chiat/Day office in San Francisco and went on to lead award winning campaigns for another large variety of clients, including, most notably, adidas, Fox Sports Net, and Motorola. With more high profile, gold pencil and lion winning campaigns including the first ‘viral’ video to receive top honors by the AICP John helped TBWA/Chiat/Day SF become one the most awarded offices in the world.
In 2007, he left to help launch T.A.G. SF. As global creative lead on Xbox, his first year resulted in the Halo 3 “Believe” campaign. With it’s unique approach to integrated storytelling, it became the most creatively awarded campaign of the decade, garnering top honors at every major international award shows including the Integrated Titanium Grand Prix and Film Grand Prix at Cannes, Best in Show at the One Show, Grandy, Grand Clio, Grand Effie, the Art Director’s Club, Addy’s, D&AD, AICP, and more. Once released, Halo 3 become the biggest launch in entertainment history. This and other content driven successes led John to cofound agency two fifteen in 2010 in San Francisco, where he served as ECD/Partner. With it’s continued award winning global Xbox success joined by the social media driven content launch of the Kin phone among other campaigns, agency two fifteen celebrated it’s first birthday by being named to Creativity’s “Alist”, placing it among the 10 most creative agencies in the world.
In summer of 2011, John accepted the role of Chief Creative Officer at BBH New York. One year later the agency was named to Creativity’s “AList” for the first time in it’s history. With integrated campaigns for clients like Playstation, Axe, Google and Cole Haan it has grown to become one of the most awarded agencies in NYC, and was recently named one of Creativity’s “Innovators of the Year” in 2014, “One to Watch” by Adage, and was the only agency in North America to win Gold Cannes lions in both the Film and Cyber categories at the 2014 festival. For this and other efforts, John was recently named one of the “Adweek 50”, the annual list of the top 50 innovators and influencers in marketing. And in January of 2015, he was named BBH’s first ever Creative Chairman in New York.
Over his career John has received every single top international creative honor several times over, including the One Show Best in Show, Grand Clio, The Grandy, and the Cannes Grand Prix, which he has won twice.
Catherine PattersonCatherine Patterson serves as Director of Experiences and branded content, for VMLY&R North America, where she leads teams in identifying, architecting and developing branded content platforms and experiences for all clients, with a focus on the crossroads of culture and technology.
Her work has received highest honors worldwide with multi-channel multi-year wins at the Cannes Festival of Creativity, the One Show, D&AD, the Webby Awards, FastCo Innovation SXSW, and others. During her tenure at Y&R, Catherine established best practices, trained creative, tech and production units in strategic and integrated production, and delivered multi-million-dollar programs for clients in the consumer packaged goods, tech, not-for-profit and social cause spaces. She’s masterminded strategic partnerships with the New York International Children’s Film Festival, the 92 Street Y, and is working on an initiative designed to reboot historical exploration with partners including the Explorers Club and others. She’s recognized as an industry leader, a positive force for good, and was voted one of Adweek’s top branded-content creators.
Daniel PhelanEric PicardEric Picard is an advertising technology expert with more than 20 years of experience in the ad technology industry. Eric is currently Vice President of Advertising Product Management at Pandora Media. Previously Eric led product strategy for the DSP business at MediaMath, which acquired his startup Rare Crowds in 2014. Rare Crowds built micro-segmentation technology for finding valuable highly targeted audiences, at scale, and was a spin-out from TRAFFIQ, where Eric was the Chief Product Officer.
Previous to this, Eric was at Microsoft for six years, where he had a variety of roles in technology strategy. He helped set the company’s long-term vision for advertising technology, emerging media product planning, planning for incubation & research teams, and designed next generation advertising products. Eric managed advertising technology acquisition planning from 2005 through 2007 – including reviewing hundreds of deals, and participating on deal teams for numerous pivotal acquisitions, such as Massive, Screen Tonic, adECN, aQuantive and others.
Eric started working in ad technology as founder and director of product management at Bluestreak from 1997 to 2004, where he oversaw advertising products, such as third-party ad serving, ad analytics, rich media products and led development of many company technologies. A frequent speaker across the industry, Eric has written about advertising technology since 1999.
Joe PinskyJoe Pinsky is the head of product development of OTT solutions for Amazon Advertising. His team of product managers and software developers focuses on building products that enable our customers, advertisers, and publishers to grow their businesses. His team looks across products, content, creative formats, supply, and measurement to take a holistic view of digital video advertising. In 2019, Joe was instrumental in the launch of IMDb TV which unlocked unique ad-supported OTT reach. His team also enabled viewers worldwide to watch Thursday Night Football on Amazon Prime Video and Twitch. Additionally, products like genre blocking and video creative builder help build interactivity for OTT ads and give advertisers more control. In working closely with Amazon Publisher Services, Joe has built header bidder solutions for advertisers and helped to connect publishers to new advertising demand. We are excited to have Joe serve as a board member on the IAB’s Video Center of Excellence and be an active participant in critical conversations that are shaping customer experiences and the advertising industry at large. Prior to joining Amazon, Joe worked as a consultant at The Boston Consulting group in Chicago. Joe holds a Bachelor’s degree from Kansas State University and an MBA from Michigan University’s Ross School of Business. Joe lives in Seattle with his one daughter and two sons.
Gruia Pitigoi-AronGruia Pitigoi-Aron is the Vice President of Product for The Trade Desk. In this role, Gruia oversees the teams responsible for all product management, user experience, and enterprise solutions. These teams work closely with all internal business teams, engineering, clients, and partners as they strive to ship the right product at the right time with global impact and scale.
Prior to joining The Trade Desk, Gruia spent 10 years at Microsoft as a Product Manager in various capacities, working on Outlook.com/Hotmail, Windows Live Agents, and BizTalk Server. The general focus was always on core parts of the systems, with the largest amount of time spent scaling and managing Hotmail’s ever increasing storage infrastructure.
Gruia received his M.S. in Computer Science from the University of California, Los Angeles, and his bachelor’s degree in Computer Science for the University of California, Berkeley. He is based in The Trade Desk’s offices in San Jose, CA.
Krishna PoolaStephanie PragerStephanie is responsible for Twitter’s advertising business running through Agencies, Ads API, and Sales Partners, globally. Her team equips these partners with creative solutions to scale and deliver business outcomes for their portfolio of clients.
Prior to joining Twitter in 2013, Stephanie was a Managing Partner at MEC, where she led the Digital Practice. Earlier, as Vice President at MediaVest USA, she was responsible for overseeing research, development, and execution of digital media strategy for her clients.
Ms. Prager was named a 2020 “Female Frontier” honoree by Campaign US and was honored as one of Advertising Age’s “Women to Watch” in 2018.
She resides in New York City, holds a degree from Lehigh University, and is a proud wife and mother of two. She is @stephanieprager on Twitter.
Jay PrasadJay Prasad is Chief Strategy Officer for LiveRamp.
Mr. Prasad has led VideoAmp’s agency, broadcaster and data partnerships that were instrumental in developing new products such as ATV Ignite and it’s partnerships with Mediaocean, Comscore, and FreeWheel. Notably, Mr. Prasad is a co-inventor on VideoAmp’s patents.
Prior to joining VideoAmp, Mr. Prasad served as VP of Global Business Development at TubeMogul where he led the company’s launch of Programmatic TV, data and supply partnerships, as well as their international partnership teams in the U.S., EU, Japan, and Southeast Asia. Previously, he led strategic development at FreeWheel focused on broadcaster’s distribution to digital and OTT platforms. Jay has also held leadership roles w Yahoo!, and Ernst & Young.
Mr. Prasad holds a degree in Marketing, International Business, and Risk Management from the University of Wisconsin-Madison, and studied International Business and International Political Economics at the London Business School.
Ali RanaAs the Global Head of Snap Inc’s Measurement and Insight teams, Ali’s leads Snap Inc’s measurement strategy and the resulting execution across Snapchat’s advertiser clients. Ali’s group is responsible for providing solutions and strategic guidance to advertisers on how to measure and optimize the online and offline impact of Snapchat advertising. Prior to joining Snapchat, Ali spent 16 years at Kantar Millward Brown, more recently as the company’s Chief Digital Strategist. While at Millward Brown, Ali built a number of pioneering measurement solutions across leading platforms and advertisers.
Ali is based out of Snap Inc’s Santa Monica office in Los Angeles.
Chris RecordShenan ReedAdvertising Executive, digital media entrepreneur and public speaker, Shenan is a highly sought-after thought leader, regularly presenting at major advertising and digital media industry conferences. Her insights and opinions have been cited in The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, AdAge, MediaPost, Huffington Post, AdWeek and Women’s Wear Daily. Her deep understanding of advertising, media and analytics has mandated her inclusion on several advisory boards including Pinterest, AdLedger, Namely, Teads and Style Coalition.
Michael ReidyIn his current role, Mike oversees the digital sales for the NBCU Entertainment Vertical (NBC, USA & Syfy) with a focus on digital video and Strategic Partnerships: YouTube, Snapchat and Buzzfeed.
In his 11 year career with NBCU, Mike has held several leadership roles, most recently leading a converged team of both digital and television sellers. Mike gained acceptance into NBCU via the GE Experienced Commercial Leadership Program (ECLP); a 2-year program known for the development of Marketing and Sales Executives through Six Sigma training.
He received his BA from Southern Methodist University in Dallas, Texas, (focusing on Advertising and Theater), and his MBA from Thunderbird, the International School of Business (focusing on Marketing and Chinese).
Matthew Renne’Matthew Renne joins the Learning & Development team as an Account Director. Prior to joining the IAB, Matthew was with TBWA Worldwide where he led global partner relationships & regional precision marketing growth for Nissan. Matthew brings an energetic and detailed process driven approach to his work, which he looks forward to bringing to the L&D team. Outside the office, Matthew spends his time playing volleyball, baking, and biking.
Neal RichterWith 20 years of software experience, Neal is focused on optimizing business needs, leading tech teams to create relevant and effective data-driven products that build the bottom line and deliver client value. Prior to entering advertising technology, Neal worked at RightNow Technologies, an early CRM vendor that sold to Oracle in 2011. There Neal led a team of AI/ML engineers that pioneered the use of sentiment analysis, natural language processing and content search systems in over 36 languages within automated customer service systems. Neal currently serves as co-Chair of the OpenRTB protocol that standardized the process of RTB, the Deal-ID and the Native ads format and the new Ads.txt standard.
Joy RobinsJoy Robins is Chief Revenue Officer at The Washington Post. Robins joined The Post after five and a half years at Quartz, most recently serving as Global Chief Revenue Officer. There she led the company to triple digit growth while holding senior positions including SVP Global Revenue and Strategy and Vice President of Advertising and Strategy.
Before joining Quartz, Robins was a senior director at NBC News Digital and Vice President of digital advertising at BBC Worldwide. Her early career included positions at The Weather Channel and OMD.
Robins sits on the Board of Directors of the Ad Council, IAB and the DCN. In 2018, Robins was named one of the industry insiders solving digital advertising’s problems by Business Insider, and in 2017 she was recognized by Ad Age’s 40 under 40.
Robins graduated from Rutgers University.
Melissa RocaStudied Public Relations and Advertising at City College and bring several years of experience working in administrative roles.
Mike RomoffMike Romoff runs the Global Agency and Channel Sales team, helping the world’s biggest advertisers and their clients harness the power of LinkedIn’s platform. His breadth of experience spans a 19-year career where he has held key General Management, Operations, and Business Development positions at companies such as NBC, IDG, 360i and The Industry Standard Magazine (back in the day). Prior to his current role, Mike led the Global Sales and Advertising Operations teams at LinkedIn, responsible for the overall day-to-day operations of its advertising business. Mike holds a BA from Amherst College and an MBA from Columbia Business School as well as a 200 hour yoga instructor certification. He currently lives in Manhattan with his wife Heatherlynn and two children Niko and Bianka.
Scott RosenbergScott joined Roku in 2012 as Vice President of Advertising to develop and lead the company’s advertising business and was promoted in 2017 to GM and SVP of Advertising. In late 2017 he became GM of Platform Business overseeing both advertising and content and services. Before joining Roku, Scott co-founded and served as CEO of Umami Co, a companion TV mobile application company. Prior, Scott served as Vice President of Advanced Advertising at Rovi Corporation, where he led advertising sales. He also served as Director of Product Management at BlackArrow, Inc., a TV ad serving technology company. Earlier in his career, Scott held product and engineering roles focused on advertising and video technologies at Replay TV, Analog Devices and Intel Corporation. Scott holds a bachelor’s degree. in Computer Science from Princeton University and was a Fulbright Fellow to Japan. He also holds a master’s degree in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and an M.B.A. from the Sloan School at MIT.
Speaking experienceScott is a regular on the speaking circuit, participating in conferences including Advertising Week, IAB Digital Newfronts, SXSW, NATPE, Video Ad Summit, On Demand Summit and many more.
Randall RothenbergRandall Rothenberg is the Executive Chair of the Interactive Advertising Bureau, the trade association for digital media and marketing in the United States. Among the IAB’s 750 member companies are such major platforms as Google, Facebook, Microsoft, and Snap; the nation’s most important ad-supported media companies, including The New York Times, Walt Disney Co., NBC Universal, ViacomCBS, Hearst Magazines, Spotify, Verizon Media, Hulu, Warner Media, LinkedIn, and Meredith; incumbent and disruptor brands, including Coca-Cola, Walmart, Procter & Gamble, Hubble Contacts, ThirdLove, General Motors, Johnson & Johnson, and Citigroup; and scores of technology and data companies, among them Mediamath, LiveRamp, Quantcast, and Pubmatic.
Doug RozenAs CEO of dentsu Media across the Americas, Doug supports 3,000+ of the most forward-thinking media experts (across Carat, iProspect, dentsu X, 360i, Amplifi and more) who every day strive to deliver like never before. Known for exploiting the intersection of data, technology, and creativity to help modern marketers champion progress, Doug has been recognized for leading businesses through digital transformation and fortunate to be a part of numerous industry firsts.
Doug most recently served as the first Chief Media Officer at award-winning agency 360i, where he helped them become a Forrester leader, MediaPost Agency of the Year, and win over 20 new clients. He joined 360i from OMD, where he led all digital and innovation activities and drove client relationships with Apple, Hasbro, Eli Lilly, Disney, among others. Before OMD, Doug served as Chief Innovation Officer and SVP, General Manager at Meredith, where he led mobile and social activity, oversaw new products, and ran the entertainment client portfolio. Prior to Meredith, Doug was SVP at Carlson Marketing, where he developed and managed the global loyalty provider’s agency services unit including, creative, media, mobile, social, and strategy offerings. While there, he also helped in its acquisition by Aimia. Doug also served as Senior Partner and Managing Director at JWT, where he established[email protected]and combined it with JWT’s direct and data offerings to form[email protected]This ultimately led to one of the top non-traditional agencies at its time. Doug’s prior experience includes many firsts: building the first intranet for a major auto OEM, designing the first online acquisition campaign for a national ISP, and streaming one of the first collegiate football games.
Doug is a cancer survivor and proud advocate for Stand Up to Cancer. He is an avid cyclist and currently lives in CT with his wife and two teenage children.
Tim RuderTim has more than 20 years experience working with digital news organizations to grow audiences, institutionalize editorial best practices, create new products and get the most from tools and technologies to drive great results.
He understands traffic opportunities from all sources (search, social, paid marketing, PR, etc.) and how a publisher can capture and keep new audiences while being true to their voice, brand and strategy. He is most effective when working across publisher departments — editorial, tech, marketing and sales — helping the individuals and teams maximize their contribution to common goals.
Tim’s results include: capturing the highest share of a target audience of any news web site, substantially increasing site engagement, improving visibility in search, increasing reach in social networks and more. Typical engagements will see improvements of 20 to 100% in the first year.
Ruder developed product lines for publishers that exceeded $40 million in second year revenues (and have continued growing), improved workflows to lower costs and developed new business strategies for publishers in need of a pivot. In addition to delivering business results, Tim’s work has received many industry accolades, including multiple Eppy’s, Webby’s, a Wammie and one of the first 1to1 Innovator Awards (for his work on personalization in news).
Tim is also an accomplished public speaker and has appeared at the World Association of Newspapers (WAN/IFRA) World Congress, multiple appearances at SxSW and numerous appearance at a variety of search, marketing and product development conferences.
Rosemarie RyanRosemarie is a renowned leader, brand builder and rabble-rouser in the marketing industry.
She began her career in account planning and was among the first wave of Brits to import the Account Planning discipline to the United States at Chiat Day. As president of K&B, she took it from a 30-person boutique to a 400-person strong award-winning agency. She then took on the mantle of leading the 125 year-old JWT into the 21st century. In her tenure she restructured the workplace, the teams and creative product, and doubled the profits of the agency. Not satisfied with reinventing an agency, she decided it was time to reinvent the industry.
In September of 2010, Rosemarie, along with her creative partner Ty Montague, left JWT and founded co:collective. Co: is a Storydoing collective focused on business and brand transformation and is fortunate enough to be working with likes of YouTube, Infiniti , Google and Timberland.
In September 2012, Rosemarie was named as one of the ‘100 most influential Women in Advertising’, by Advertising Age.
Paul RyanPaul Ryan is the chief technology officer at OpenX where he oversees the company’s technology and product development. He leads a global team of more than 150 engineers, data scientists and product managers tasked with fostering the development of new, innovative programmatic technology. Prior to OpenX, Paul held CTO roles at Yellow Pages Group, Leads360, and Overture. During his time at Overture, Paul was principally responsible for engineering the world’s first high-scale auction-based market for the web, an innovation that established the foundation of today’s $45 billion programmatic marketplace.
Paul holds a BSE, EECS from Princeton University, an MS in Computer Science from John Hopkins University and an MBA from the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania.
John SabellaExperienced Chief Technology Officer with a demonstrated history of working in the internet industry. Strong information technology professional skilled in Cloud Transformation, Digital Strategy, Mobile Applications, Software as a Service (SaaS), and Start-ups.
Positive, proven, and successful, technology executive has the strategic vision for developing assets and adding the greatest value. Driven by big challenges, to build the next “big thing”, to hire the teams, to build the processes, to get everyone producing at their best potential and to collaborate with clients. Committed to the company’s business objectives and selfless in ethos, I believe that facts should drive direction, and that performance needs to be measured with clear goals and objectives.
David Sable“Never forget that only dead fish swim with the current.”These words of British author-journalist Malcolm Muggeridge, spoken many years ago, are a mantra for David Sable, whose advertising career spans more than 30 years. His profound commitment to innovative customer-centric advertising continues to power his journey.
David was appointed Global CEO of Y&R in February 2011, but his ties to the agency date back to his first job in the industry, when he joined Y&R’s training program in 1976. He later went on to Wells Rich Greene, then co-founded the award-winning Israeli agency, Mimsar-Arielly. On his return to the U.S., David spent time at PR giant Burson-Marsteller and Cohn & Wolfe (both parts of the Y&R group), where he was counselor to clients like Colgate-Palmolive, Digital Equipment Corporation and Coca-Cola.
David rejoined Y&R in 1990 to lead the United States Postal Service account, where his service approach helped direct a new messaging platform and other assets, including its logo, which are still in use today. Under David’s leadership of the USPS team, Y&R created the industry’s very first website for a client.
An early digital entrepreneur, David co-founded Genesis Direct, an innovative, web-based firm instrumental in establishing a direct-to-fan Internet presence for the National Hockey league, Major League Baseball, National Football league and the National Basketball and the National Basketball Association.
For the 10 years prior to Y&R, David was vice chairman and COO at sibling company, Wunderman, where he was responsible for managing their global marketing services network â€” and presided over its digital transformation and the creation of their digital offering. As a leading authority on digital marketing, David serves as an adviser to many digital start-ups in the world.
Not surprisingly, David has an active presence in the blogosphere, with The Weekly Ramble, which he has been writing since 2006 and which has garnered a large audience. Fast Company recently invited David to become an expert blogger on corporate culture; his first blog for them, “Finding the ‘Colere’ in Corporate Culture,” debuted recently. Y&R’s global client, Xerox, asked him to share his thoughts on productivity on their blog, #FocusFriday: Reframing Productivity.
David is a Director at Large of the American Association of Advertising Agencies (the 4As) and was a founding member of its Digital Advisory Board. He has served on juries at the Cannes International Creative Festival, including the highly prestigious Titanium panel. He is a frequent speaker on the digital environment, for example, to Microsoft UK, where he spoke on how digital is driving every communication today. David is frequently tapped for his marketing and digital expertise throughout the industry and around the world. Recent interviews include Campaign Asia, Forbes on driving innovation, Forbes on how everything is digital, as well as Digiday and Microsoft Advertising.
Active in philanthropy and education all his life, David was named to the New Yorkers Volunteer State Office of National and Community Service Commission in 2010. Two years earlier, the Mayor of the City of New York, Michael R. Bloomberg, appointed him to serve as a member of the Cultural Advisory Committee of the New York City Department of Cultural Affairs.
David and his wife, Debbie, have two married daughters and Henry and Teddy, their treasured grandsons.
Gyanda SachdevaLena SafronLena Safron is an experienced graphic designer who has created for an eclectic collection of individuals, companies, and organizations. She has designed marketing materials for women’s fashion brands Vince Camuto and Jones New York while at Authentic Brands Group. Other work experience includes designing for entertainment marketing company Passion Point Collective and event planning company Drury Design Dynamics. She has also worked on the accounts of select entertainment and pharma clients. Lena received her BFA in Communications Design at Pratt Institute and her senior thesis work was featured at the Pratt Show for industry professionals. Offline, Lena enjoys going to concerts and Broadway shows, and in the past year has developed a love for hiking and the great outdoors. She stays on-trend creatively by following other artists on social media and visiting galleries and museums whenever possible. Lena is very excited to join IAB as the first in-house graphic designer!Jenny SchauerJenny Schauer currently holds a Media VP/Group Director role at Digitas where she’s found a home for the last eight years. During the majority of her tenure there she’s been guiding the strategic direction for a large financial services account in the Video Investment Lead role which oversees their total video strategy across linear and digital platforms. Additionally Jenny now leads the planning oversight for Hilton hotels, with a focus on advanced video strategies.
In addition to her day-to-day role, Jenny is also the national Video Center of Excellence lead at Digitas, heading up a cross-office COE team that’s shaping the video approach for Digitas overall. Through this role, she also acts the agency’s voice on digital video in the trades – frequently quoted in leading publications like AdAge, Digiday, Reuters, and eMarketer.
Jenny was also named the 2015 CIMA Rising Star, as well as one of a select few national 2015 Rising Stars from Cynopsis Media.
Susan SchiekoferSusan Schiekofer is the Chief Digital Investment Officer for GroupM North America. She is responsible for digital trading and implementation across all of GroupM’s agencies including Mindshare, MEC, MediaCom, Maxus, and Essence.
Susan’s digital skill set, coupled with her broader knowledge of trading best practices across all media formats, ensures that GroupM continues to lead the market with the best, most valuable and accountable digital solutions for clients of GroupM agencies.
She is figurative in GroupM’s efforts to improve the integrity of the digital marketplace in the U.S. by championing viewability, anti-fraud safeguards, measurement, and standards.
Schiekofer has been a leader in the digital media space at WPP and GroupM since 1994. She founded the digital media offering at Ogilvy & Mather, which was later rebranded to[email protected], and worked on accounts including IBM, TD Ameritrade and Lenovo, among many others. In 2010, Schiekofer joined MEC to head up the AT&T digital business, and soon became responsible for all of digital at MEC. In July of 2014, she moved to GroupM to lead digital investment for Maxus and MediaCom, and to assume responsibility for all of online video.
Wilfried SchobeiriWil Schobeiri is the Chief Technology Officer at MediaMath, the leading independent technology platform for Marketers. Based in Chicago, he oversees the technology strategy and architecture that power the operations of thousands of marketers globally. While his focus is primarily the development and operations of large-scale distributed systems, he’s also obsessed with building great teams and creating strong engineering cultures. A lifetime technologist and entrepreneur, Wil launched his first tech company at the age of 13 out of his parent’s basement. Prior to joining MediaMath, he led development at a number of startups, including Tap.Me, a gaming ad platform that was acquired by MediaMath in December 2012. Since then, he’s played a central role in MediaMath’s transformation into a platform-first technology organization. Wil is a proud college dropout.
Michael SchoenMichael Schoen is the VP, Marketing Solutions at Neustar, developing and perfecting an integrated platform that enables companies to win in the connected age. Michael oversees the end-to-end system of identity that gives marketers a complete, real-time portrait of their customers and prospects based on accurate data, enabling a personalized dialogue across all marketing channels. His leadership has been instrumental in architecting the industry’s most authoritative and real-time marketing platform, built on trusted identity across people, places, and things.
Prior to joining Neustar in 2014, Michael was the EVP, Product at Cadreon, IPG’s cross-channel audience measurement, management and buying platform. Michael was responsible for driving the product strategy, development, and technology partnerships that enabled Cadreon’s offerings across all addressable media. Prior to joining Cadreon, Michael was General Manager, Advertising Platforms and VP, Product & Technology at LookSmart, where he was responsible for building out paid search platform and publisher syndication business.
Michael holds an AB in Computer Science from Harvard College and an MBA from UCLA.
Michael ScottKatie ShellKatie joined IAB Tech Lab in May 2021. She works as a Data Coordinator. Katie is an alumna of Bucknell University in the Freeman College of Management where she earned a Bachelor’s degree in Markets, Innovation, and Design in 2020.
Sheila ShultzSteve SilversSomer SimpsonKate SloanKate Sloan is a Programmatic Sales Director at Hearst Magazines Digital Media (HMDM).
In this role, she helps advertisers connect with readers of Hearst Magazines’ portfolio of iconic brands – including ELLE, Esquire, Good Housekeeping – by utilizing evolving technologies to increase transactional efficiency and ROI. She helps lead a team of five programmatic sellers representing Hearst’s global magazine brands as well as Complex Media.
Prior to joining HMDM, Kate worked for Core Audience, a corporate-level group that unified data and ad tech partnerships across Hearst’s TV, Newspaper, and Magazine divisions.
Earlier in her career, Kate worked at Rocket Fuel (DSP) around the time of their IPO and helped to grow the company’s largest telecom and CPG accounts.
Alexus SmithAndrew SnyderKelsey SorensonDavid SpectorDave Spector is the Co-Founder of ThirdLove, the 3rd largest online bra and underwear company in America. Dave has always been an entrepreneur, starting his first company in college and another during business school. Prior to founding ThirdLove, he focused on consumer internet, e-commerce, and analytics investing as a Partner at Sequoia Capital. One investment, in Stella & Dot, got him particularly interested in female-focused e-commerce. Before Sequoia, Dave was at IBM and Google, where he helped lead Google’s first efforts in commerce with the launch of Google Checkout, Product Search, and Google Analytics. Outside of ThirdLove, he’s an angel investor in two dozen companies and an advisor to others.
Dave has been recognized as: National Retail Federation Disruptors, Goldman Sachs’ 100 Most Intriguing Entrepreneurs and EY Entrepreneur of the Year in Northern California. He is also a certified pilot and enthusiastically very unaccomplished as a triathlete.
Scott SpencerScott Spencer is the Director of Product Management, Sustainable Ads at Google. Scott sets the vision and strategy for Google’s work to create a long-term viable ads ecosystem for publishers, users, and advertisers. Scott and his team develop products that help Google to combat ad fraud, ad spam and malware, and maintain the integrity of broader display network. His team oversees Google’s advertising and publisher policies that help to protect people from harmful, misleading, offensive and annoying ads. As part of those efforts, Scott works with the Coalition for Better Ads, an industry group tasked to improve online ad experiences that drive people to install ad blockers and establish an industry-wide standard for ad experiences. In addition, Scott represents Google in industry forums like TAG and the IAB Tech Lab, help to develop and advocate for standards across the industry.
Throughout his time at Google, Scott has worked on nearly every product and platform in Google’s ads portfolio. He played an instrumental role in the development and launch of the DoubleClick Ad Exchange over 10 years ago as well as Google’s acquisition of Invite Media which eventually would become DoubleClick Bid Manager, Google’s demand side platform (DSP).
Before joining Google, Scott was a management consultant at Integral, Inc. providing strategy analysis to fortune 500 companies on Product Development Process and Customer Satisfaction leverage. Scott holds a BS in Economics from MIT.
David StaasDavid Staas is President of NinthDecimal, responsible for the company’s go-to-market strategy and overseeing marketing, product management, engineering, and research. A 20-year veteran of the mobile ecosystem, David has created break-through businesses and solutions in the advertising, marketing, and mobile infrastructure markets. At NinthDecimal, David has led the creation of Location Graph, the industry’s first mobile audience platform based on location behavior, as well as the company’s evolution into mobile and enterprise data services for the world’s leading brands.
Prior to NinthDecimal, David built one of the first mobile ad networks and mobile ad platforms at Ad Infuse (acquired by Velti). Prior to Ad Infuse, David led global product marketing at Openwave Systems, the company that created today’s mobile Internet. He also co-founded the Messaging Anti-Abuse Working Group, an industry consortium of mobile carriers, telcos, and media companies to combat spam. He joined Openwave through the acquisition of Software.com, where he led product management and market development for the company’s flagship communications product. David has also launched new services and new products at companies such as Deloitte Consulting and Coca-Cola, and is a frequent author and speaker at key industry events.
Nada StirrattNada C. Stirratt is the Vice President, North America, Global Business Group for Meta. Prior to Meta, Nada served as the Chief Executive Officer of Verve Wireless, Inc., a provider of SaS-location-based mobile advertising solutions for retail, auto, CPG, restaurants, and other drive-to-retail brand advertisers.
Nada also previously served as Chief Revenue Officer and Executive Vice President for Acxiom, the data-mining and analytics company. In this role, Nada led all of the client-facing areas of the business, including field, account management, and consulting across the globe.
Stirratt came to Acxiom with a proven track record of delivering transformational business results. Prior to Acxiom, she served as Chief Revenue Officer at MySpace, where she led global sales, strategy and advertising operations. Previously, Nada served as Executive Vice President of digital advertising at MTV Networks, where she successfully led the company’s aggressive expansion into the digital advertising arena across all properties, overseeing advertising sales, strategy and operations.
Earlier in her career, Nada was senior vice president and general manager of advertising sales at Advertising.com and also held senior positions with some of the world’s most well-known brands, including AOL, Moviefone, Hearst Publications and Condé Nast. Stirratt holds a bachelor’s degree in advertising from the University of Illinois. She is based in New York City.
Dan TaylorDan Taylor leads display advertising platform strategy for Google’s global business organization, focused on product innovation, commercialization and advertiser engagement at scale across Google Ads and Google Marketing Platform in all countries where Google operates.
Primary focus is on building and growing advertiser solutions and innovations in data strategy, inventory quality, ad formats, automated buying and measurement to power every ad experience and make the web and apps work for advertisers, publishers and consumers across devices.
Prior to his current role, Dan led high performing sales and activation teams in Search, Display, Video and Mobile as well as a long career in broadcast media sales. Dan is based in New York.
Ajit ThupilChristina Ting CuaChristina leads Product Marketing for all of Instagram’s Ad Solutions. This includes Instagram’s Brand and Direct Response solutions in both Feed and Stories. She was part of the early team that helped Instagram scale its monetization products and is passionate about helping marketers find success on Instagram. Prior to Instagram, Christina worked at Bain and Company in their LA and SF offices and Google’s NY office. Christina is a NorCal native, received a BS in Business Administration from UC Berkeley, and an MBA from Harvard Business School.
John TooheyJohn was the Group Vice President of Finance for Time Warner Cable Media in New York, serving as the finance lead for TWC’s $1 billion advertising arm.
Prior to this role, John spent a year establishing TWC’s change management function as Group Vice President of Operational Effectiveness. John coordinated process improvement activities across the company. John previously spent six years as a leader in TWC’s Corporate Finance group, including three years heading up TWC’s investor relations support and competitive analysis activities as Vice President of Financial Analysis and Special projects, as well as three years in charge of TWC’s Corporate Financial Planning and Analysis team.
John’s broad media finance background includes four years at Cablevision, seven years at CBS and five years at NBC, all with progressive management responsibilities. John also spent three years as a mid-career management consultant at Booz Allen Hamilton, advising a variety of clients both inside and outside the media industry.
John holds a bachelor’s degree in Government from Harvard University, and an MBA from Columbia Business School. He and his wife Kristin have three children and live in Westport, CT.
Zak TreuhaftJohn TrimbleJohn Trimble serves as the Chief Advertising Revenue Officer of SiriusXM, where he is responsible for all advertising revenue, strategic sales marketing, and advertising operations for SiriusXM, Pandora, Stitcher and Adswizz. Throughout his 11 years at SXM, he was part of the management team that built Pandora from a Start Up into the public markets and most recently combined the assets of SiriusXM into the advertising brand, SXM Media. SXM Media’s diverse revenue streams tap satellite, podcasting and streaming audio that reach consumers in their cars as well as on their computers, mobile phones, and consumer electronic devices. Prior to SiriusXM, John held several senior level roles overseeing Sales at Glam Media, Fox Interactive Media, and Phase 2 Media.
John received his BA from St. Lawrence University. He currently sits on the Interactive Advertising Board and the Mobile Media Association Board. He is also on the Board of the Danny Butler Memorial Fund and St. Vincent’s Hospital in Harrison, NY. He resides in Rye, New York with his wife, Maggie, and their four children, Molly, Jack, Colin, and Libby.
Joey TrotzJoey Trotz is a recognized industry leader and expert in digital advertising. For 20+ years, he has identified, built and implemented critical technologies supporting hundreds of millions of dollars in marketing budgets.
He is currently the Global Head of Technology for Watson Advertising where he leads engineering efforts for cognitive marketing and advertising tech. Mr. Trotz works on the policies, strategies, and roadmaps where technology and monetization intersect, focused on applying emerging technology including IBM Watson and IBM Blockchain in support of strategic goals.
Previously, Mr. Trotz held a variety of executive roles during his 18-year tenure at Turner Broadcasting.
Steve TruxalAs VP of Product Management, Steve oversees the publisher, marketplaces, and platform product groups at Xandr. He and his team set the strategy and roadmap, develop innovative products, and drive commercialization for key product offerings, including the adserver, SSP, media products, supply & demand quality, and DSP integrations. Steve joined AppNexus 2011, prior to the company’s acquisition by AT&T and subsequent evolution into Xandr. Throughout his tenure, Steve has been responsible for a multitude of different product areas, including the fraud prevention, the establishment of Prebid, identity, and consumer privacy & regulation. He’s led industry groups including TAG Anti-Malware and the IAB’s establishment of Transparency and Consent Framework for The GDPR.
Prior to AppNexus, Steve was a management consultant with McKinsey & Company at their NYC office. He specialized in high tech & media industries and advised the leadership of Fortune 100 companies on their strategy and operations. Steve holds a Ph.D. in mechanical engineering, a Masters in electrical engineering, and a Masters in mechanical engineering from The University of Michigan, where he focused on micro-electronic systems.
Dorothy TseDorothy Tse is the Vice President of Product at Quantcast. In her current role, Dorothy is responsible for scaling Quantcast’s Advertising product suite while developing new capabilities that drive value for customers. Dorothy most recently served as Head of Global Marketing Solutions Technology at Facebook where she led Product Management for global internal data products and internal CRM. Prior to Facebook, Tse spent time at Nielsen as SVP of Product Leadership responsible for their digital advertising measurement products and self service capabilities. She was previously Vice President of Product Management at advertising effectiveness company, Vizu which was acquired by Nielsen and led their acquisition activities. Dorothy holds a B.S. in International Business from the University of California, Davis.
Dana TunksAs Broadsign’s Chief Financial Officer, Dana Tunks oversees all financial reporting, treasury, corporate development, corporate finance and taxation and risk-management activities globally.
A seasoned professional, Dana has held roles as Chief Financial Officer and Advisory Board Member of software and technology companies in the healthcare, mobile commerce and emissions industries. She also spent over 23 years as a Senior Partner with Ernst & Young LLP, both in Audits and Consulting.
Dana is a Chartered Accountant and received her Honours Bachelor of Business Administration from Wilfrid Laurier University. Her community involvement has included the Audit Committee of Wilfrid Laurier University, Innovation Council at the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants and acting as President, Vice President and Audit Committee Chair of the Kitchener-Waterloo YWCA.
Lisa UtzschneiderLisa Utzschneider is the chief executive officer of Integral Ad Science and a member of the company’s board of directors. IAS is a global technology company that offers data and solutions to establish a safer, more effective advertising ecosystem. Lisa joined IAS as CEO in January 2019, bringing more than 20 years of digital advertising expertise and tech-industry leadership experience to the role.
Prior to joining IAS, Lisa held the position of chief revenue officer at Yahoo where she oversaw Yahoo’s global sales organization and provided solutions for the needs of advertisers worldwide. Lisa served as CRO up through the acquisition of Yahoo by Verizon in June 2017.
Previously, Lisa was Amazon’s Vice President of Global Advertising Sales, where she developed the company’s global advertising business through product, marketing, sales, and operations strategies, driving consistent revenue growth. Prior to Amazon, Lisa spent 10 years at Microsoft culminating in her role as General Manager of the national sales and service teams where she focused on driving revenue for the company’s top online advertising accounts. She also developed the U.S. advertising go-to-market strategy.
Lisa has previously served as a board member for the Ad Council and the Interactive Advertising Bureau, where she was also a member of the organization’s executive committee. Notable honors include: the Adweek 50, Business Insider’s “Most Powerful Women in Mobile Advertising”, New York Business Journal’s “Women of Influence” and Working Mother’s “50 Most Powerful Moms”. Lisa holds a bachelor’s degree from Bates College and a master’s degree in public administration from New York University. She resides in Greenwich, CT with her husband and two daughters.
Lisa ValentinoLisa recently joined Disney as EVP, Client & Brand Solutions reporting to President, Rita Ferro. Lisa and her division is challenged with architecting next generation partnerships rooted in insights, integrated content marketing, and digital for the multi-billion dollar company. Previously, Lisa was Executive Vice President of Revenue Innovation for Univision Communications Inc. (UCI), the leading media company serving Hispanic America. Valentino led UCI’s digital, integrated marketing and revenue teams to develop strategy and activation for customer solutions. Prior to joining UCI, Valentino worked at Condé Nast where she served as Chief Revenue Officer, overseeing growth as well as strategic planning to accelerate new revenue growth and transform Condé Nast from a publisher to a client led media partner and brand storyteller. Prior to Condé Nast, Valentino worked at ESPN where she oversaw a division responsible for over $1 billion in revenue focused on multimedia partnerships across the Company’s portfolio, including domestic and international TV, digital, events, and print. She also managed all digital and mobile ad sales revenue for the company in her first 3 years with the company. Valentino graduated from Lafayette College with dual degrees in English and Art History and played D1 soccer. She currently resides in Westchester and is wife to Ami and mother to Liam (9) and Olivia (7).
Rik van der KooiRik van der Kooi is the Corporate Vice President of Microsoft Advertising. In this capacity, he leads the company’s global advertising business and its sales, marketing, support and partnership organization, which is focused on delivering advertising and monetization solutions for marketers. Rik also plays a key leadership role in an evolved strategy across Microsoft’s search, advertising, news and browser businesses, holding accountability for growth and development as well as expansion of offerings for enterprise and consumer customers.
Under Rik’s leadership, the Microsoft Advertising business has grown to over $9B in revenue and the team has successfully formed numerous industry partnerships with Verizon, Yahoo!, AppNexus, AOL and others. He is a prior Chairman and current board member of the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB). He is an executive sponsor of the Blacks at Microsoft (BAM) employee resource group and considers himself an ally to all marginalized populations.
Prior to his current role as CVP, Rik served as the Chief Operating Officer and Chief Financial Officer of the Online Services Division at Microsoft. Before that, he held the roles of Chief Financial Officer of Windows; General Manager of Finance and Administration for the Sales, Marketing and Services Group in EMEA, based in Paris; and Finance Director for the Benelux countries. Prior to joining Microsoft in 1999, Rik was Chief Financial Officer for IBC Vehicles, Ltd., a subsidiary of General Motors Corp. in the United Kingdom.
Rik earned his Master of Business Administration from Instituto de Estudios Superiores de la Empresa (IESE) in Barcelona and his Bachelor of Business Administration from Nyenrode Business University in the Netherlands.
Rik is married with three kids and enjoys playing music and soccer in his spare time.
Julie Van UllenJulie Van Ullen is the Managing Director for US and Canada for Rakuten Marketing. In her role, Julie is responsible for overseeing the commercial organization selling and supporting the holistic suite of Rakuten Marketing’s affiliate and performance marketing solutions for Brands, Agencies, and Publishers. Additionally, Julie drives the strategy and vision related to all aspects of go-to-market for Rakuten’s Affiliate+ (data, prospecting, retargeting, social, search) offerings. Prior to joining Rakuten Marketing, Julie was the Vice President of Digital, for FreeWheel. In her role, she served as digital segment GM to oversee product vision, client acquisition, and overall go-to-market strategy for FreeWheel’s suite of video ad serving and monetization solutions. Before FreeWheel, Julie served as Vice President of Publisher Solutions at premium ad exchange, OpenX, overseeing the Sales function for the East Coast and before that as Vice President of Member Services at the IAB where she was responsible for attracting new members and developing a portfolio of opportunities and initiatives to keep current members engaged. As a part of serving IAB’s membership, Julie oversaw IAB’s elite Committees and Councils, charged with putting industry best practices and thought leadership into the marketplace. Those focal areas included Native, Programmatic, Digital Video, AdvancedTV, Digital Audio, Social Media, and Gaming.
Prior to making her transition to the digital space, Julie was an Editor at The Taunton Press in the books division of Fine Woodworking and Fine Homebuilding and still enjoys furniture-making in her free time. When not on the job, ex-opera singer Julie sings with the classic rock cover band.
Donia VanceDonia Vance, joins the IAB as Senior Content Director. She brings a wide breadth of experience to her role including go-to-market strategy, content development, experiential programming and brand marketing. Donia was previously the Senior Partnerships Director at Unger Media’s Greenwich Wine + Food Festival where she managed and oversaw national accounts including PepsiCo, Jeep and Anheuser-Busch. Prior to that, she was the Executive Director Customer Engagement and Events at WebMD where she created strategy for marketing and thought leadership activations that drove brand awareness and revenue for both the Pharma and CPG sides of the business. She has also worked at Hearst, Conde Nast, Martha Stewart and Rolling Stone, where she first developed her passion for media and experiential marketing.
Megan VasilesMegan Vasiles is a digital marketing strategist with over a decade of experience helping global organizations optimize marketing plans and build long-term strategies for success.
She lives in Manhattan and hopes to adopt a cat soon! In her downtime you can find her writing science fiction, baking tasty vegan treats, or wandering the aisles of the nearest bookstore.
Anudit VikramAnudit Vikram is a business and technology leader with over 20 years of experience, 15+ of which have been in the advertising and marketing technologies space. His deep experience in data centric product innovation and design and innate understanding of the ad-tech space make him a frequent contributor to industry publications, conferences, and round-tables.
As the SVP of Products for MediaMath, Anudit is responsible for the strategy and roadmap of the entire suite of MediaMath’s product capabilities. He drives the evolution, positioning, and launch of new features and programs across all regions and brings MediaMath’s product vision to life.
Prior to MediaMath, Anudit worked at Dun & Bradstreet, Merkle, Yahoo!, Microsoft, and other noteworthy organizations leading teams and – in his words – “building cool stuff … changing the world one release at a time!” A past board member of the IAB Data Center of Excellence and co-chair of the B2B Committee, Anudit is also active in helping shape the industry as it shape-shifts through its maturation.
Anudit holds a Masters in Technology Management from Columbia University and a Bachelors in Engineering from the University of Pune (India). He lives in NYC with his wife and is an avid photographer and optimistic golfer in his spare time.
Deborah WahlDeborah Wahl was appointed General Motors Global Chief Marketing Officer (CMO) on Sept. 1, 2019. She previously served as the Global CMO of Cadillac, where she guided the directional shift of the brands’ look and feel – with bright visuals and heavy hitting anthems. She also took the brand to new places like ComplexCon, the PGA, and launched aggressive campaigns to bring customers to showrooms, like XT4 – 4TX. Rooted firmly in the school of performance marketing, she always drives her teams to use data to change how they seek and engage with consumers. Prior to joining General Motors, Deborah served as the Senior Vice President and CMO for McDonald’s from 2014 to 2017, where she played a key role in the brand’s turnaround. In addition to McDonald’s, Deborah has held a number of CMO and Vice President positions, including at PulteGroup , Chrysler and Lexus. Deborah earned a bachelor’s degree in Economics from Wellesley College and an MBA from The Wharton School. She also has a master’s degree from The Lauder Institute, University of Pennsylvania. Forbes named her to its Most Influential CMO list in 2018 and 2019, and she was recognized as one of 2019 AdWeek 50 Marketing and Tech Execs. Deborah is an active business leader who serves on the boards of Groupon, Mediaocean and The Mobile Marketing Association (MMA), as well as on the Board of Trustees of Cranbrook Educational Community.
Steve WaxSteve Wax attended Reed College and the UCLA Film School; he received one of the first American Institute short film grants, was a member of the landmark San Francisco film collective, Cine Manifest.
Steve was also a founding board member of the Independent Feature Project. In the first phase of his career, he produced a number of independent feature films.
Steve founded Chelsea Pictures in 1987; Chelsea pioneered the use of feature and documentary directors in commercial production.
Under Chelsea’s banner Wax produced the feature film Unmade Beds. He also exec-produced the Oscar Nominated short film, Killing Joe, and the Emmy-nominated documentary Following Sean.
In 2000 Steve began working with two of the Blair Witch filmmakers, forming Campfire, the narrative ad agency. Campfire’s social marketing projects include brand clients such as GM, Verizon, Dr Pepper/Snapple, Harley-Davidson, and many entertainment brands, including True Blood, Game of Thrones, and Shark Week. Campfire is now a division of Sapient Nitro and the Publicis Groupe.
Steve is now a partner at The Cooke Wax Partnership, a two year old agency that combines brand strategy with social marketing. Among Cooke Wax’s clients are IMAX, United Way of NYC, Libertine drinks and TmaxSoft.
He’s also a member of the Agency Advisory Board of the Interactive Agency Bureau, and a longstanding board member of Issue Project Room, the landmark experimental theater in Brooklyn.
Ken WeinerKen Weiner leads the engineering, product, and supply teams behind the industry’s top computer vision platform for marketers and rights holders. As an active member of the ad tech community, Weiner is a guest columnist for VentureBeat and Forbes, a frequent speaker at conferences and a participant of industry groups such as IAB’s OpenRTB Working Group. He also runs the LA AdTech Meetup which brings together ad tech engineers and product managers. Weiner was LA Business Journal’s 2015 CTO of the Year, and in 2003, he was included in the InfoWorld 100 for his work on uPortal, an open-source web portal framework for the higher education community.
Before coming to GumGum, Weiner was the Director of Engineering at the lead-generation platform LowerMyBills.com, acquired by Experian in 2005. He has also worked as an open-source software consultant, a project manager and an instructor at Interactive Business Solutions, acquired by Unicon Inc. in 2003. Weiner received a B.S. from UCLA and currently lives in Los Angeles. Away from the office, he enjoys mountain biking, hiking, California native plants, jazz music and playing the saxophone.
Jason WhiteJason White is the Senior Vice President & GM of Global Programmatic Revenue & Partnerships for CBS Interactive as well as serving as the Co-Chairman of the Programmatic Council at the IAB and board member of IAB Tech Lab. Jason has extensive experience in online digital media and marketing, specifically centered on development and implementation of best-of-breed digital strategies for both digital publishers and advertisers. He has proven success in analyzing consumer behavior trends and implementing brand, direct response and digital monetization programs with a strong background in strategy, management, sales, marketing and product development. Triple-digit revenue growth through customer acquisition and monetization initiatives can be attributed to White’s work with various Fortune 100 companies and start-ups.
Before CBSi, White was an SVP and GM at OpenX and EVP of Marketing at TrueCar. Prior to OpenX, White was SVP and GM at the FOX Audience Network building the MyAds ad platform, in addition to the third party network and the first RTB exchange, which was among the Top 5 ad networks per ComScore. White has also held roles at Bank of America and LowerMyBills.
Jason serves on the advisory boards of Convertro, TrueCar, and OpenX and graduated from the University of Georgia.
Grant WhitmoreGrant Whitmore is SVP, Chief Digital Operations Officer at Tribune Publishing where he is responsible for Tribune’s digital operation strategy and execution. Grant’s focus includes improving monetization and revenue delivery across all Tribune properties, generating corporate-wide advertising growth, strengthening local and national sales efforts, and improving overall digital operations. Prior to his tenure at Tribune, Grant held a variety of digital leadership positions at companies ranging from startups to global media properties.
Bryan WienerBryan Wiener is CEO of digital agency 360i. Under his leadership, 360i has earned a spot on Ad Age’s coveted “Agency A-List” and Fast Company’s “World’s Most Innovative Companies” roster, helping clients like Coca-Cola, Kraft Foods, Diageo and NBC Universal engage their target audiences across the ever-changing digital landscape. Mediaweek has named Bryan a Top 50 person in media two years running for his visionary leadership within the industry and recently named him a Media All-Star.
Bryan’s background includes a series of senior management positions at Net2Phone Global Services, a pioneer in VoIP communications technology. Prior to that, he served as General Manager at TheGlobe.com and Director of Business Development at Standard and Poor’s. Bryan is Vice Chairman of the AAAA Digital Board and serves on the AAAA National Board of Directors and the IAB Agency Advisor Board. He is also an advisor to NYU’s Media & Entertainment Student & Alumni Associations.
Bryan holds an MBA from the Stern School of Business at NYU and a BA in History from Syracuse University.
Follow Bryan on Twitter at @bwiener.
Rob WilkRob Wilk leads the advertising team at Microsoft and is responsible for building and scaling Microsoft’s search/native advertising offerings with nearly $10 billion in revenue annually. Rob manages the sales, marketing, operations, retail media and partnerships teams with more than 2,000 employees across the globe.
Rob has 25 years of advertising and media experience with the majority specifically focused on digital media and paid search on both the agency and publisher sides. Before joining Microsoft, Rob was the founding Vice President of Sales at Foursquare, responsible for building the sales team and leading sales initiatives across the Foursquare brand and agency partners. Prior to Foursquare, Rob worked at Yahoo leading a team of US- and Canada-based employees tasked with driving optimal paid search performance for Yahoo’s biggest advertisers with yearly revenue of $1 billion. He oversaw the field search account management team, the global search account management team and the award-winning search optimization and strategy team.
Rob is a nationally recognized media expert and has spoken at Cannes, Advertising Week, Search Engine Strategies Conference, Search Marketing Expo Conference, Search Insider Summits and many more. He also actively serves on the board of SCOPE, anorganization that provides summer camp scholarships to children from underserved communities.
John WinsorJohn Winsor is a leading strategic marketing and product innovation thinker known for his work in collaboration, co-creation and crowdsourcing. He is the CEO of Victors & Spoils, the world’s first creative advertising agency built on crowdsourcing principles and, in 2011, a business named to Advertising Age’s “Agency A-List 10 to Watch” list and Mashable’s Top 5 Digital Agencies.
Before founding Victors & Spoils, Winsor was Vice President and Executive Director of Strategy and Innovation at Crispin Porter + Bogusky, helping the company become the most awarded advertising agency in the world in 2008 and 2009. He brought his co-creation philosophy to the agency that formed the underpinning of the agency’s strategy practice that fueled work such as, Dominos, “Transparency,” Best Buy’s “Twelpforce” and Microsoft’s “I’m a PC.”Prior to CPB, he founded his own company, Radar Communications, in 1998 â€“ with Nike as its first client â€“ and sold it to CP+B in 2007. At Radar, Winsor used co-creation, strategy and academic-based market intelligence tools to help some of the country’s most progressive companies learn from key voices in their communities.
Winsor was a journalist before founding Radar, building a magazine publishing company devoted to sports that included mountain biking, in-line skating and extreme skiing. In 1990, he acquired the rights to publish a then-struggling magazine, Women’s Sports & Fitness. Within three years, he turned that magazine around and launched several other highly profitable titles and events, including The Gravity Games. He sold the business to Conde Nast in 1998.
Winsor is a frequent industry speaker and respected author. He gave the speech “The Trials and Tribulations of Harnessing the Chaos of Abundance” at the Guardian UK summit in Cannes. He spoke, along with Mark-Hans Richer, CMO of Harley-Davidson, at the M50 Summit. He was recently interviewed by Harvard Business School for a study on crowdsourcing in the agency environment. He will be speaking at the 2013 Mirren conference in New York City.
His books include “Beyond the Brand: Why Engaging the Right Customers is Essential to Winning in Business,” “Spark: Be more Innovative through Co-Creation,” “Baked In: Creating Products and Businesses That Market Themselves” (with Alex Bogusky) and “Flipped: How Bottom-Up Co-Creation is Replacing Top-Down Innovation.” Baked In, a bestseller, was named an award winner in the marketing category for the 2009 800-CEO-Read Business Book Awards.
He was recently featured in the book “Pioneers of Digital” a showcase of success stories from leaders in advertising, marketing, search and social media, which credited him with turning his “â€¦wealth of communication and digital experienceâ€¦into a crowdsourcing (ad)venture.”Throughout his career Winsor has been deeply involved in the start-up and technology communities. He was a founding investor in Nau, the sustainable clothing company and has been on the board of directors of Black Diamond Equipment and Lijit Technologies.
Outside of work he pursues his passions of climbing, skiing, cycling and surfing. Among his accomplishments, he set the world record for the ascent and round-trip of Kilimanjaro.
Winsor earned a bachelor’s degree from Colorado College and an MBA from the Daniels College of Business at the University of Denver.
Rachel XanttopoulosRachel Xanttopoulos is the Product Marketing Lead for Instagram Business Verticals, the ads innovation team at Instagram. In this role, Rachel focuses on building new ad formats to create advertiser value for specific industry verticals such as Retail and Entertainment. Rachel is passionate about the intersection of tech and media—after starting her career at the Boston Consulting Group (BCG), Rachel worked as a Manager in the New York Times Corporate Strategy and Business Development Group, and then as a Product Manager for Kindle at Amazon. Rachel holds an MBA from the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University.
Joanne ZaiacAs President of the DigitasLBi New York region, Joanne is responsible for driving the development and growth of the NYC and Atlanta offices. She leads a team overseeing the strategy and execution of Digitas services across the region’s client base (including American Express, Aetna, Comcast, Delta, and Travelers). During her tenure as President, she has driven significant expansion and growth of Digitas New York, adding several Fortune 500 clients and recruiting some of the industry’s top talent. Under Joanne’s leadership, the NY & Atlanta offices received more accolades as a “Best Place to Work” than ever before in their history. Joanne has over 30 years of advertising industry experience. She has led innovative, strategic & cross channel marketing programs that have built brand equity for national brands. Her career as an integrated marketer began in general advertising at Havas Dentsu Marsteller. She then spent 14 years in Direct Marketing at Wunderman Worldwide/Young & Rubicam. She joined Digitas in 1999 to gain more experience in digital marketing. Joanne serves on the Board of Directors for Junior Achievement New York, the[email protected]Advisory Board, is an AWNY (Advertising Women New York) Executive Member, and is on the IAB (Interactive Advertising Bureau) Agency Advisory Board. She was honored in 2011 by AWNY and Working Mother Magazine as Advertising Working Mother of the Year. She is also an honored recipient of the Academy of Women Achiever’s (YWCA) Women Achiever Award. Joanne graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University with a BA in History and Literature, and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa. She lives in Manhattan with her husband and three children.
Joe ZawadzkiMediaMath’s CEO Joe Zawadzki has spent his career redefining the marketing and advertising industries through software and data sciences. He has created and scaled companies with a combined $2B in market value, personally invested in a range of start-ups and is sought after for his vision on the future of technology.
Throughout his career representing marketers at top-tier agencies and Fortune 500 companies such as AOL, American Express, IAC, Verizon and Vonage, Joe has focused on the integration of media, data and data sciences, in software. That reached its peak with the founding of MediaMath in 2007, a company credited with starting the programmatic revolution with the first demand-side platform. MediaMath’s offering, centered around the TerminalOne software, powers the marketing practice of more than 3,500 brands worldwide.
Prior to MediaMath, Joe was Founder, President and Chairman of Poindexter Systems / [x+1] a pure-play marketing optimization enterprise, where he helped found and incubate Right Media, which sold to Yahoo! in 2007. He has been an active champion of digital media and the broader NYC startup ecosystem, having made investments in over 50 companies including 33Across, Accordant, AppNexus, CreditKarma, DataMinr, Electronifi, Integral Ad Science, Namely, Optoro, Sourcepoint, and Vistar Media.
Joe serves on the Executive Committee and Board of the Direct Marketing Association, an almost century-old trade association focused on serving the interests of consumers and brands through data-driven marketing, and of Hope for Vision, an organization dedicated to raising money for the development of treatments and cures for blinding diseases, with particular focus on retinal degenerative diseases.
He is a graduate of Harvard University and was a Teaching Fellow in cosmology, set theory and the history of science. He lives in New York City with his wife, Daria, and their children Dune and Jack.
Sheng ZhouSheng Zhou serves as General Manager of Product at TikTok Ads. In this role, he is responsible for the TikTok Ads Platform development as well as management of advertiser growth for the company. He also leads the company’s efforts on a number of new monetization projects, including the recently launched TikTok Creator Marketplace.
With a rich background in business and product development in the IT space, Zhou has honed his expertise both as an entrepreneur and in senior leadership positions at several leading global technology companies, including Alibaba Group and Microsoft. Versatile and quick to adapt to rapidly changing market environments, Zhou excels at building robust teams from the ground up and cultivating early stage products alongside managing and commercializing complex business initiatives.
Prior to joining TikTok, Zhou served as Vice President at Alibaba Entertainment Group, primarily focusing on Youku’s advertising business and user operation. Before Youku was acquired by Alibaba, Zhou served as Corporate Vice President of Youku Tudou Inc., where he led R&D efforts and drove the development of advertising services and a PGC/UGC content ecosystem.
Zhou began his career with Microsoft, undertaking several product management roles throughout a 10-year tenure across multiple products, including Office, CRM, Windows Mobile and Online Advertising.
Zhou received a master’s degree in Management Information Systems from the University of Iowa and a bachelor’s degree in Computer Science from Peking University.
Julian ZilberbrandJulian Zilberbrand is the Executive Vice President of Audience Science at Viacom. Zilberbrand oversees key areas in the data strategy division including: audience onboarding and segmentation, advanced analytics and digital media executions. His team is responsible for the management and aggregation of data across all of Viacom’s media properties. Data is used to inform all aspects of media and programming at Viacom from sales to investment. His team works closely with groups across the organization to help enable a data driven approach to business which is paramount to success in today’s media landscape.
Prior to joining Viacom, Zilberbrand was Executive Vice President of Activation Standards, Insights and Technology at ZenithOptimedia. In this role, he managed the activations standards, digital operations, analytics, technology and strategic partnerships groups. Before joining Zenith, he was SVP, global digital director, strategic partnerships and technology solutions at Starcom Mediavest Group. Prior to joining the agency world in 2004, Zilberbrand held product specialist and client service roles at Eyeblaster and developed the company’s Eyeblaster University training program. Earlier in his career, he worked at Doubleclick as a project manager and technical analyst.
In addition to his work responsibilities, he held advisor roles for the IAB, 4A’s and the iMedia conferences. Zilberbrand is known as a vocal leader in the industry covering a wide array of topics from viewability with the 3MS Blue Ribbon committee to data and general industry trends. From 2013-2014, Zilberbrand chaired the Digital Committee for the Media Ratings Council and was recognized by the organization for his leadership and service. In 2014, he received the AdMonster Digital Media Leadership Award and the Marketers Choice Awards named him the Data, Analytics and Operations Innovator of the year for exemplary leadership in digital marketing.
Jianna CaronanJianna is a digital native – creating graphics, editing videos, and growing social media pages since 2010. Formerly an engineering student, she has had the pleasure of supporting brands and organizations on campus, through internships, and in a freelance capacity. Jianna received her Associates from the County College of Morris and is a proud alumna of Rutgers Business School where she received a Bachelor of Science in Marketing in 2021.
Jerry DischlerJerry Dischler is a Vice President and General Manager at Google, and oversees Google’s Advertising products including search, display, shopping, travel and video advertising, as well as analytics.
A 10+ year Ads veteran, Jerry led Google to move beyond plain text ads to deeper experiences, including the development of Ad Sitelinks and Product Listing Ads. Through various leadership roles on the team, he’s played an important role in defining the future of advertising at Google including leading the transition from desktop to mobile advertising, accelerating direct response advertising on YouTube, and developing new ad products for SMBs.
Prior to his current role, Jerry led the product and engineering teams for ads on Google’s owned and operated properties (Search, YouTube, Maps, Gmail, Discover), buying platforms (Google Ads, Search Ads 360, Display & Video 360), and Google’s home-grown sales and support platform. Earlier in his career at Google, Jerry led Google’s commerce products, including Google Checkout (now Google Pay) and Google Product Search (now Google Shopping).
Before Google, Jerry served as the Director of Engineering at Avolent where he was instrumental in developing the company’s award-winning billing and payment products. He also worked in engineering and leadership roles at Hyperion, Sana Security, and Accenture, where his work focused on enterprise billing, customer care, and security software.
Jerry earned his bachelor’s degree from the University of Chicago and his MBA from The Wharton School of Business.
Chad EngelgauChad Engelgau serves as Acxiom’s President and Chief Executive Officer, providing strategic leadership to the organization, which focuses on helping brands better use data, identity and technology solutions to understand people and create growth for their businesses. Chad is also a founding member of Acxiom’s IDEA (Inclusion, Diversity, Equity and Awareness) Council and the executive sponsor for two of Acxiom’s Business Resource Groups, Acxiom Women LEAD and Acxiom Black Employee Network.
Previously, Chad served as Global Chief Data Strategist at Kinesso, the marketing intelligence unit of The Interpublic Group of Companies, Inc. (IPG), Acxiom’s parent company. Chad joined Kinesso after spending 13 years at Acxiom, where he held a variety of key leadership roles, including Chief Marketing Officer and Head of Strategy. Over his tenure he was responsible for leading data and identity product management and strategy as well as product marketing.
Before joining Acxiom, Chad spent nine years at Dell Inc., rising from product engineering manager to corporate strategist for the Texas-based technology company. Prior to his years at Dell, Chad held various product management and technical roles at other enterprise companies.
Anne FrisbieAnne is SVP of Global Brand & Programmatic at InMobi. Anne joined InMobi in 2008. Prior to InMobi, Anne managed revenue for Yahoo! as Vice President of Category and Sales Intelligence, providing strategic insights and digital media solutions to leading brands and agencies. A digital-media industry veteran of over 20 years, Anne’s experience also includes cofounding an e-commerce company, executing some of the first search marketing campaigns in the industry at AltaVista and Overture, and directing publisher development at what is now most famously known as Elon Musk’s first start-up, Zip2.
Anne is an active member in the mobile community. In 2011 she was selected as one of Mobile Entertainment Magazine’s Top 10 Women in Mobile and in 2012 became Business Insiders #6 in their Most Powerful Woman in Mobile Advertising. In 2011 and 2012, Anne Frisbie served on the North America board of the MMA. In 2013, Anne was named a co-chair for the IAB’s mobile advertising committee, and a Board of Director member for the IAB’s Mobile Marketing Center of Excellence.
Anne holds a Bachelor Degree in Economics from Georgetown University. Anne is an avid wine collector, cocktail maker, loves playing duplicate bridge and is a happy mom of three children.
Barbara KrzanickaBarbara has been an Executive Assistant for 20 years, 4 years have been spent in the not-for-profit world.
She has a varied background in complex calendar management, project management, and events coordination.
Barbara holds a B.A. in Criminal Justice from John Jay College of Criminal Justice.
Jonathan MoralesJonathan Morales has a decade of experience helping nonprofits derive value from their data. In his most recent role at NPR, Jonathan led the fundraising and finance teams’ inhouse migration to Salesforce, leveraging the platform’s flexibility to support network fundraising, optimize complex business processes, and surface relevant information. Jonathan previously held database management roles at the USO and the National Trust for Historic Preservation, and consulted for other nonprofits. Jonathan holds degrees in history and music from Georgetown University and Oberlin College and Conservatory.
Ryan Polley PolleyRyan Polley is the Chief Product Officer at Kargo. In his role, Ryan is responsible for product strategy and delivery, leading the product and engineering teams at Kargo. With almost two decades of experience in the media industry, he started his career at RealNetworks and served as an executive at ComScore and Rubicon Project most recently. Today, Ryan’s passionate about enabling advertising technologies that allow brands to tell compelling stories. He’s a graduate of the University of Washington in Seattle and currently lives near San Francisco, CA.
Dwenne SaindoryDwenne is a graduate of Murray Koppelman School of Business. She earned her M.S focusing on Global Business and received her undergraduate degree in Marketing from York College. She is a fashion content creator, educator, and philanthropist.
Kevin SolingerAs Group VP, Product Management at Xandr, Kevin oversees the product platform supporting Xandr’s Invest and Monetize products, across both Digital and Linear TV. He previously led Xandr’s platform integration of enterprise data, supporting both the Media and Marketplace businesses with identity solutions, audience building, and attribution.
Having joined AppNexus in 2011 prior to its acquisition by AT&T and the launch of Xandr in 2018, Kevin has held a number of roles across the company in Product Architecture, Research and Development, and Product Management. He led the integration of viewability measurement technology into the AppNexus exchange, as well as the development of optimization and transaction-related features, for which he is co-inventor of two patents. Kevin has also served as product lead for partner integrations, reporting and analytics, and inventory quality.
Prior to AppNexus, Kevin was a Senior Engineer at the New York Stock Exchange, responsible for the development and management of mission-critical, low-latency market data platforms.
Kevin holds a Bachelor of Applied Science in Computer Science and a Bachelor of Arts in Economics from the University of Pennsylvania.
Katie StroudKatie Stroud is Senior Product Manager with IAB Tech Lab, currently managing products for improving ad experiences in ad tech. Katie has been working with IAB since 2011 on products for video, creative formatting, ad delivery, and rich media interactions in video and display. Nearly native to the Pacific Northwest, Katie enjoys the rain, long bike rides (sometimes at the same time), and finding ways to improve ad experiences for brands, publishers, and consumers.
<%= first_name %> <%= last_name %>
