old id = 1186
Fairness, Transparency, and Accountability & ABOUT ML - Partnership on AI
2020
https://new.partnershiponai.org/program/fairness-transparency-and-accountability-about-ml

Fairness, Transparency, and Accountability & ABOUT MLOverviewAs AI systems are deployed across an ever-growing number of domains, the fairness, transparency, and accountability of these systems has become a critical societal concern. This Program examines the intersections between AI and some of humanity’s most fundamental values, addressing urgent questions about algorithmic equity, explainability, responsibility, and inclusion.
Through original research and multistakeholder input, our Fairness, Transparency, and Accountability work asks how AI can build a world that is more (and not less) just than the one that came before it. And by offering actionable resources for implementing transparency at scale, ABOUT ML seeks to operationalize these insights with full-cycle documentation of machine learning systems.
ImpactInvestigating Challenges to Diversity in AIOur Fairness, Transparency, and Accountability & ABOUT ML WorkFairness, Transparency, and Accountability encompasses PAI’s large body of research and programming around algorithmic fairness, explainability, criminal justice, and diversity and inclusion. In 2020 alone, this work examined the challenges organizations face when they seek to measure and mitigate algorithmic bias using demographic data, provide meaningful explanations to diverse stakeholders, address bias in recidivism risk assessment tools, and build more inclusive AI teams.
With ABOUT ML, PAI is leading a multistakeholder effort to develop guidelines for the documentation of machine learning systems, setting new industry norms for transparency in AI. This means not just identifying the necessary components of transparency, but releasing actionable resources to help organizations operationalize transparency at scale. Developed through an iterative, multistakeholder process, these resources pool the collective efforts and insights of academic researchers, industry practitioners, civil society organizations, and the impacted public.
UpdatesShedding Light on the Trade-offs of Using Demographic Data for Algorithmic FairnessKnowing the Risks: A Necessary Step to Using Demographic Data for Algorithmic FairnessABOUT ML Resources LibraryOperationalizing AI Ethics Through Documentation: ABOUT ML in 2021 and BeyondCrucial Yet Overlooked: Why We Must Reconcile Legal and Technical Approaches to Algorithmic BiasFrom Affirmative Action to Affirmative Algorithms: The Legal Challenges Threatening Progress on Algorithmic FairnessWhy PATTERN Should Not Be Used: The Perils of Using Algorithmic Risk Assessment Tools During COVID-19Working to Address Algorithmic Bias? Don’t Overlook the Role of Demographic DataProgram WorkstreamsABOUT MLAI & Criminal JusticeAlgorithmic Fairness & the LawDemographic Data© 2022 Partnership on AI | All Rights Reserved
