old id = 1209
OII | Visiting Policy Fellowship Programme
1865
https://www.oii.ox.ac.uk/people/visiting-policy-fellowship-programme

Visiting Policy Fellowship ProgrammeVisiting Policy Fellowship ProgrammePageContentsThe Oxford Internet Institute Visiting Policy Fellowship Programme provides a unique means of engagement for Oxford researchers and policy makers in government, industry and civil society. Competitively evaluated applications will be accepted on a rolling basis for a two-year term of appointment.
The programme provides a customized professional development opportunity to senior policy leads from different sectors. This is not just an opportunity to attend lectures, interview experts and spend time on strategic thinking about technology and society. It is an opportunity for co-working, developing ideas together, and staying briefed on the latest research. When new ideas are needed for policy leadership, you need a trusted contact for someone who is in a position to advise. Having insight at the right time is the result of extended, deep contact with the latest research and thinking. It is difficult to model when you will be called on for your opinion on society’s grand challenges in artificial intelligence, the internet of things, or the future of work. It is difficult to anticipate when a policy crisis will hit in your domain of work. But being able to recognize high quality research on a rapid turn-around is a unique skill. Our Visiting Policy Fellows develop this skill and these contacts.
How to ApplyApply to be a Visiting Policy FellowApplications are accepted on a rolling basis for a two-year term of appointment.
Applications will be competitive, and will require a 2-page resume and a 1-page statement about what the applicants want out of the program. Compliance with existing protocols on work visas is expected. We will seek good social and intellectual diversity in our Fellowship cohorts.
Before applying, it is strongly advised that you identify and reach out to your potential academic supervisor or collaborator for an informal conversation about applying. You can browseour People pagesto find that person. Alternatively, feel free toget in touch with Mark Malbas, our Head of Strategic Relationships and Policy Engagement, who will be pleased to help.
Applications are particularly welcome from women, and black and minority ethnic people, who are under-represented in posts at Oxford University. To be considered, please submit the follow material.
About the ProgrammeFor globally-minded foundations, technology firms, and civil society groups, the Oxford Internet Institute is the foothold for understanding a diversity of international, especially European perspectives on technology policy. The OII is unique in that 15 years have built up an extensive alumni network that now works in technology industry, policy, and civil society groups around the world. There is no similarly positioned research institute. The EU listens to the OII—many of our alumni work there. Our alumni and colleagues work for industry and regulators in massive markets like Brazil, China and India. Our faculty experts work in literally every region. We are the liveliest center for engagement on technology policy issues in the world, with an active calendar of events, visiting speakers, off the record workshops and opportunities for professional networking. A limited number of Visiting Policy Fellows each year participate in the life of the OII at a pace they can set.
Tackling Policy ChallengesThis programme responds to the three most important challenges in contemporary policy making in technology and information.
First, the great danger in recent legal and policy responses to AI, blockchain technologies, and junk news over social media isoverregulation. Many governments—and multilateral organizations like the EU—like to protect their political cultures but try to do so with relatively simple and clumsy policy instruments. We may be past the point where industry self-regulation is sufficient to protect democratic institutions, but what regulatory responses might strengthen those institutions?Second, public policy makers around the worldactively avoidpolicy ideas from Silicon Valley, US universities and American civil society groups. Small policy and research centres based at US Universities have little impact on the rest of the world, because they are seen as captured by the technology industry and encumbered by a narrow libertarianism. US-based civil liberties groups have little credibility in legal traditions where political speech is balanced with public responsibility and modest policy oversight. Nonetheless, it is that permissive environment that allowed so much innovation in technology design, so how can we craft public policy in a way that preserves public life and cultures of innovation?Third, many multinational technology corporations are quiteisolatedfrom real-time policy research. They can easily access knowledge from paid consultants and published sources, but they often prefer to rely on academics who can aggregate the knowledge and provide accessible, smartly curated content.
The challenge for universities and the OII is to position our work as impactful to industry and government, not simply a scholarly endeavour worthy of pure philanthropy. We all want clear, balanced and sensibly composed regulatory guidance, and an extended programme of visiting fellows from the senior members of government, industry and civil society can provide a platform for composing that guidance.
Programme Structure and OfferingMany Universities have policy fellows who are tasked with crafting policy papers. This is a more ambitious program of engagement on urgent issues, and is unique becauseAppointment as a Visiting Policy Fellow recognizes policy leadership from across sectors unique opportunities to be exposed to the latest research, engage with the world’s leading thinkers, and develop their own professional networks. The goal of the Visiting Policy Fellow program is to enhance the OII’s academic, industry, and public profile by hosting a mixture of 4-6 Visiting Policy Fellows each year and providing Visiting Policy Fellows with an enticing and multi-tiered package of engagements and privileges when they come to Oxford or attend our events in London.
PrioritiesThe priority policy domains likely to be supported include (1) the Internet of Things, (2) applications of machine learning and artificial intelligence (3) cybersecurity, (4) content curation, management, censorship, and distribution, (5) applications of blockchain technologies, (6) global gig economy trends, and (7) differential privacy and data de-identification. We already have some of the world’s leading faculty-led research teams working in these domains. This Visiting Policy Fellowship program will capitalize on our existing research strengths, share the latest research with industry and government, and advance policy conversations. Ultimately, this program will help shape the global agenda for information policy.
Fee StructureProgramme fees take into account “desk fee” rates across the University and the OII’s wider range of activities and broader range of resources designed for the leadership of contemporary policy-making organizations. These fees are also calibrated to be within the budgets that many organizations have set aside for leadership development and professional training opportunities:There may be additional fees for optional administrative or secretarial services, research assistance, and admission to particular cost-bearing special events and programmes. Fellows bear the costs of any additional accommodation, transport to and from Oxford, and other charges related to the Programme. The ideal applicant is a mid-career professional whose employer supports the cost of educational programs and professional development.
Benefits for FellowsAppointed fellows will receive the following benefits of association with the OII:EntitlementsAppointed fellows will be entitled to the following services and attributions:ResponsibilitiesAppointed fellows will have several responsibilities during the period of their appointment:OpportunitiesAppointed fellows will have several professional development and networking opportunities over the course of the appointment.
ContactMark MalbasHead of Strategic Relationships and Policy Engagement, Oxford Internet Institute1 St. Giles, Oxford, OX1 3JSmark.malbas@oii.ox.ac.ukDirect Line +44 (0) 1865 287220Main Line +44 (0) 1865 287210Professor Victoria NashDirector, Oxford Internet Institute1 St. Giles, Oxford, OX1 3JSexec.nash@oii.ox.ac.ukDirect Line +44 (0) 1865 287231Main Line +44 (0) 1865 2872101 St Giles, Oxford, OX1 3JS, UK+44 (0)1865 287210General:enquiries@oii.ox.ac.ukPress:press@oii.ox.ac.ukFOLLOW US:INFORMATION FOR:We are using cookies to give you the best experience on our website.
You can find out more about which cookies we are using or switch them off insettings.
This website uses cookies so that we can provide you with the best user experience possible. Cookie information is stored in your browser and performs functions such as recognising you when you return to our website and helping our team to understand which sections of the website you find most interesting and useful.
Strictly Necessary Cookie should be enabled at all times so that we can save your preferences for cookie settings.
If you disable this cookie, we will not be able to save your preferences. This means that every time you visit this website you will need to enable or disable cookies again.
This website uses the following additional cookies from third party websites:Please enable Strictly Necessary Cookies first so that we can save your preferences!This website uses Google Tags and Google Analytics to collect anonymised information such as the number of visitors to the site, and the most popular pages. Keeping these cookies enabled helps the OII improve our website.
Enabling this option will allow cookies from:Please enable Strictly Necessary Cookies first so that we can save your preferences!
