old id = 3582
Nvidia's Arm Acquisition Brings the Two Key Technologies of This Century Under One Roof
2011
https://singularityhub.com/2020/09/21/nvidias-arm-acquisition-brings-the-two-key-technologies-of-this-century-under-one-roof

Nvidia’s Arm Acquisition Brings the Two Key Technologies of This Century Under One RoofArtificial intelligence and mobile computing have been two of the most disruptive technologies of this century. The unification of the two companies that made them possible could have wide-ranging consequences for the future ofcomputing.
California-based Nvidia’s graphics processing units (GPUs) have powered the deep learning revolution ever since Google researchers discovered in 2011 that they could run neural networks far more efficiently than conventional CPUs. UK company Arm’s energy-efficient chip designs have dominatedthemobile and embedded computing marketsfor even longer.
Now the two will join forces after the American company announced a $40 billiondealto buy Arm from its Japanese owner, Softbank. In apress release announcing the deal,Nvidia touted its potential to rapidly expand the reach ofAIinto all areas of our lives.
“In the years ahead, trillions of computers running AI will create a new internet-of-things that is thousands of times larger than today’s internet-of-people,” saidNvidiafounder and CEO Jensen Huang. “Uniting NVIDIA’s AI computing capabilities with the vast ecosystem of Arm’s CPU, we can advance computing from the cloud, smartphones, PCs, self-driving cars and robotics, to edge IoT, and expand AI computing to every corner of the globe.”There are good reasons to believe the hype. The two companies are absolutelydominant in their respective fields—Nvidia’s GPUs support more than 97percentof AI computing infrastructure offered by big cloud service providers, and Arm’s chips power more than 90percentof smartphones. And there’s little overlap in their competencies, which means the relationship could be a truly symbiotic one.
“I think the deal “fits like a glove” in that Arm plays in areas that Nvidia does not or isn’t that successful, while NVIDIA plays in many places Arm doesn’t or isn’t that successful,” analyst Patrick MoorheadwroteinForbes.
One of the most obvious directions would be to expand Nvidia’s AI capabilities to the kind of low-power edge devices that Arm excels in. There’s growing demand for AI in devices like smartphones, wearables, cars, and drones, where transmitting data to the cloud for processing isundesirableeither for reasons of privacy or speed.
But there might also be fruitful exchanges in the other direction. Huang told Moorhead a major focus would be bringing Arm’s expertise in energy efficiency to the data center. That’s a big concern for technology companies whose electricity bills and green credentialsare taking a battering thanks to the huge amounts of energy required to run millions of computer chips around the clock.
The deal may not be plain sailing, though, most notably due to the two companies’ differing business models. While Nvidia sells ready-made processors, Arm simply creates chip designs and thenlicensesthem to other companies who can then customize them to theirparticularhardware needs. It operates on an open-licence basis whereby any company with thenecessarycash can access its designs.
As a result, its designs are found in products builtby hundreds of companies that license its innovations, including Apple, Samsung, Huawei,Qualcomm,and even Nvidia. Some, including two of the company’s co-founders, have raised concerns that the purchase by Nvidia, which competes with many of these other companies, couldharm the neutralitythat has been central to its success.
It’s possiblethis could pushmore companies towardsRISC-V, an open-source technology developed by researchers at the University of California at Berkeleythat rivals Arm’s and is not owned by any one company. However, there are plenty of reasons why most companies still prefer arm over the less feature-rich open-source option, and it might take a considerable push to convince Arm’s customers to jump ship.
The deal will also have to navigate some thorny political issues. Unions, politicians, and business leaders in the UK have voiced concerns that it could lead to the loss of high-tech jobs, and government sources have suggested conditions could be placed on the deal.
Regulators in other countries could alsoput a spanner in the works. China is concerned that if Arm becomes US-owned, many of the Chinese companies that rely on its technology could become victims of export restrictions as the China-US trade war drags on. South Korea is also wary that the deal could create a new technology juggernaut that could dent Samsung’s growth in similar areas.
Nvidia has made commitments to keep Arm’sheadquartersin the UK, which it says should lessen concerns around jobs and exportrestrictions. It’s also pledged to open a new world-class technology center in Cambridge and build a state-of-the-art AI supercomputer powered by Arm’s chips there. Whether the deal goes through still hangs in the balance, but of it does it could spur a whole new wave of AI innovation.
Image Credit:NvidiaFollow Edd:LatestThis Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through May 21)Volvo and DHL Are Partnering on Hub-to-Hub Autonomous TruckingHow a Volcanic Bombardment in Ancient Australia Led to the World’s Greatest Climate CatastropheRELATEDNanomagnetic Computing Could Drastically Cut AI’s Energy UseThe Ideal Qubit? Future Quantum Computers Could Crunch Data With Single Electrons on Neon IceScientists Just Cracked One-Way Superconductivity, Thought Impossible for Over 100 YearsHow the Extinction of Ice Age Mammals May Have Forced Us to Invent CivilizationGet the latest news from Singularity Hub!Singularity University, Singularity Hub, Singularity Summit, SU Labs, Singularity Labs, Exponential Medicine, Exponential Finance and all associated logos and design elements are trademarks and/or service marks of Singularity Education Group.
© 2022 Singularity Education Group. All Rights Reserved.
Singularity University is not a degree granting institution.
