old id = 379
Here Are the Stars the Voyager and Pioneer Spacecraft Will Visit in the Next Million Years
2006
https://singularityhub.com/2019/12/24/the-stars-the-voyager-and-pioneer-spacecraft-will-fly-by-in-the-next-million-years

Here Are the Stars the Voyager and Pioneer Spacecraft Will Visit in the Next Million YearsHumans are nowhere near an interstellar species. NoZefram Cochranehas emerged to make warp drive practical. No alienprotomolecule has erected a gateto other solar systems at the edge of our own. In this particular reality-based space opera, humans have yet to travel beyond the moon, and getting to Mars is likely still years away (at least).
Yet, even as we speak, there arefivespacecraft of Earthly origins bound for the stars. The two Voyager spacecraft and the pair of Pioneer spacecraft launched in the 1970s have achieved escape velocity out of the solar system. They’ll be joined in their interstellar voyage by the New Horizons spacecraft, which was launched in 2006 and flew by Pluto in 2015.
Though Voyager and New Horizons are still functioning, the Pioneers are long dead. In the years ahead, they’ll all go dark, doomed to silently fly the space between the stars for eons.
Eventually, they’re bound to encounter new suns and planets. Indeed, earlier this month, astronomers observed the second ever interstellar object hurtling through our own solar system. So when might our first interstellar emissaries similarly visit other systems?Moving at what amounts to a snail’s pace by galactic standards, it’ll take the ships millennia to approach the closest stars. But if we extend our gaze into geologic time, it’s a different story. In a recent study, two researchers—Coryn AL Bailer-Jones of the Max Planck Institute for Astronomy and Davide Farnocchia of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory—did the math.
Thestudywas first released earlier this year in the journalResearch Notes of the American Astronomical Society(RNAAS) and more recently in the preprint (that is, non-peer-reviewed) journal,the arXiv.
Every Interstellar Ship Needs a Star AtlasLooking skyward on a dark night, what appears to be a frozen stellar tableau is in fact in ceaseless motion. The stars are moving relative to one another at speeds more than ten times faster than some of the fastest human-made objects in history. The Voyagers and New Horizons spacecraft, for example, are traveling well over 30,000 miles per hour, but our sun, which orbits the galaxy at a leisurely pace for a star, laps them at a clip of450,000 miles per hour.
To predict which stars our first interstellar spacecraft will visit, one needs a three-dimensional star atlasin motionto compare each star’s trajectory with those of the spacecraft.
TheEuropean Space Agency’s Gaia missionis in the midst of assembling just such an atlas. Launched in 2013, the Gaia spacecraft is stationed at a Lagrange point just outside Earth’s orbit around the sun. The satellite is surveying a population of around a billion stars, and the latest dataset, released in 2018, includes position and velocity data for a subset of 7.2 million stars.
Using the Gaia dataset, Bailer-Jones and Farnocchia integrated the trajectories of these stars and the Voyager and Pioneer spacecraft to find the closest encounters in the next million years.
It’s Going to Be a Long, Lonely TripThe authors found about 60 stars the spacecraft will approach over the next million years. Of those, they’ll come within 2 parsecs of about 10. The top five closest and most interesting encounters are outlined in a table, including binary systems and two separate visits to Ross 248 (Voyager 2 and Pioneer 10) about 8,000 years apart.
All four spacecraft will also visit Earth’s nearest neighbor, Proxima Centauri, but none will arrive for at least 16,000 years, and none will fly nearer than about a parsec. That’s a long time—though not by the study’s standards—and not a particularly close encounter.
Voyager 2’s closest stellar encounter will be 0.5 parsecs roughly 40,000 years from now. Voyager 1 and the two Pioneer spacecraft will have much closer approaches at 0.2–0.3 parsecs, but they’ll take longer to get there—around 90,000 years (Pioneer 10), 300,000 years (Voyager 1), and 930,000 years (Pioneer 11).
A little perspective is in order. Space is big. Let’s start there.
The nearest approach of about 0.2 parsecs is the equivalent of over half a light year or 41,000 times the distance from the Earth to the sun. In our solar system, this is well beyond the orbit of Pluto, past the Kuiper belt, and nearly to the edge of the Oort cloud. The sun would look like a bright star at that distance; its gravity would be more of a suggestion than a demand.
In fact, though scientists theorize the Oort Cloud is the source of long-period comets, we have no direct evidence of its existence because its inhabitants are too small, dark, and distant to observe. At 0.2 parsecs, then, spacecraft like Voyager and Pioneer would be invisible to our astronomical instruments, just barely grazing the solar system before returning to interstellar space.
It doesn’t look likely any alien astronomers will observe Earth’s first four emissaries—let alone decipher the informationalgolden recordsandplaquescarried by them—inside the next million or so years. (The study, by the way, is holding back on the fate of New Horizons pending potential new missions to Kuiper belt objects in the coming years. After New Horizons has made its final maneuvers, however, the scientists can similarly plot its course through the stars.)A Million Years in a BlinkA million years is the blink of an eye on the cosmic calendar. In geologic time, or deep time, there’s a season for all things. Currently lacking the data to look farther ahead, Bailer-Jones and Farnocchia fall back on probabilities for stellar encounters, which match those of most stars, saying the spacecraft are likelier to have much closer visits the longer the timescale. Give it five million years, and it’s statistically likely the spacecraft will pass within 0.1 parsecs of a star. Go further into the future and they may well make close flybys like the two we just had from the first two observed interstellar objects to enter our solar system (the surprisingOumuamualast year and the cometBorisovthis year).
Will the spacecraft ever collide with a star, thus ending their travels permanently? Maybe. But if so, it won’t likely be for a long, long, long time—like, nearly twice the current age of the universe. So, even if our species is gone, our spacecraft will wander on. And maybe one of them will find its way into the “arms” of some other civilization, who’ll unpack a Voyager Golden Record, marvel at the bizarre anatomies of us ancient aliens, and get a kick out of Chuck Berry singing “Johnny B. Goode.”Image Credit:ESA/NASALatestThis Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through May 21)Volvo and DHL Are Partnering on Hub-to-Hub Autonomous TruckingHow a Volcanic Bombardment in Ancient Australia Led to the World’s Greatest Climate CatastropheRELATEDDemocracy Is Ailing. Here’s How We Can Start Reviving ItMoon Settlers: Scientists Say Plants Will Grow Best in Lunar ‘Soil’ From Fresh Impact CratersA New Space Academy in Colorado Will Train Private-Industry AstronautsRepublish this article for free in any language, online or in print, under theCreative Commonslicense CC BY-ND 4.0. Learn more aboutrepublishing.
RepublishYou are free to republish this article in any language, online or in print, under theCreative Commonslicense CC BY-ND 4.0. By republishing this content you agree to comply with the Singularity HubRepublishing Guidelines.
When republishing, please do not edit the contents of the article, ensure that you attribute the author and acknowledge that the article was originally published on Singularity Hub. Pleasecontact uswith any questions.
To republish this article, copy the HTML code below and paste it to your CMS. Please do not remove the pixel counter.
Press Ctrl+C to copy and Ctrl+V to paste.
How the Extinction of Ice Age Mammals May Have Forced Us to Invent CivilizationGet the latest news from Singularity Hub!Singularity University, Singularity Hub, Singularity Summit, SU Labs, Singularity Labs, Exponential Medicine, Exponential Finance and all associated logos and design elements are trademarks and/or service marks of Singularity Education Group.
© 2022 Singularity Education Group. All Rights Reserved.
Singularity University is not a degree granting institution.
