old id = 88
Climate change is making India’s brutal heat waves worse | MIT Technology Review
1901
https://www.technologyreview.com/2022/04/28/1051511/climate-change-india-heat-waves

Climate change is making India’s brutal heat waves worseAs temperatures top 110°F, the heat could be deadly, especially to those without access to cooling.
Heat waves are scorching India and Pakistan this week, breaking records as the region enters the hottest time of the year.
Some states in India have seen temperatures top 43 °C (110 °F), with northwest India likely to see even higher temperatures in the coming days, according to the Indian Meteorological Department (IMD).
Extreme heat can be deadly, especially for a region where many lack access to cooling. And climate change is making heat waves more frequent and severe, with periods of hot days stretching out longer in places like South Asia.
This heat wave is particularly concerning for its timing and its spread, saysArpita Mondal, a climate researcher at the Indian Institute of Technology Bombay. Usually, peak temperatures in the region come in May and June, just before monsoon rains bring relief, she explains, but this year has been particularly hot, particularly early. March of this year was the hotteston record, with an average temperature of 33.1 °C (nearly 92 °F).
The problem is also widespread across the country, affecting not only the typical hot spots in the northwest and southeast but also regions that aren’t used to seeing so much extreme heat, Mondal says. And the effects are even more stark because of a lack of rainfall so far this season.
“It’s part of a broader climate-change signal,” saysAmir AghaKouchak, a climate researcher at the University of California, Irvine. India’s average annual temperature increased at a rate of 0.62 °C per 100 years between 1901 and 2020, according to data from theWorld Bank. And maximum temperatures have climbed even more quickly, at a rate of 0.99 °C every 100 years.
“People think a degree or two might not matter,” AghaKouchak says, but when average temperatures increase by even small amounts, it means extreme events are becoming more likely.
The effects of climate change on weather can sometimes be difficult to tease out. But for heat waves, researchers have “very high confidence” that climate change is making the problem worse, AghaKouchak says.
Heat can havedevastating impacts on human health—356,000 deaths globally in 2019 werelinked to extreme heat. The risk is greatest for elderly people and children, but anyone without adequate access to cooling can be affected, especially if heat continues for days at a time without letting up at night.
Related StoryClimate change is bringing extreme heat and testing the limits of what people can tolerate.
Forecasting and early warning systems can help peopleprepare for extreme heat. And the IMD has started focusing on forecasting heat waves in recent years, Mondal says.
However, the realities of a developing country mean that many people will still come into harm’s way during heat waves in India. As of 2019, only about7%of Indian households had an air conditioner. And staying inside when temperatures peak might not be an option for people who depend on income from daily work, Mondal says.
Some local governments are trying to adapt to extreme heat. Ahmedabad, a city in western India, experienced an especially devastating heat wave in May 2010: the official death count reached 800 people, and up to 1,300 deaths have beenattributedto it indirectly. In 2013, the city launched aheat action plan, which included early warning systems for residents, training for health-care professionals, and adjustments to help cool buildings naturally.
Since then, other local governments have followed suit and created plans of their own, but some hope to see more national action to help people adjust to heat, Mondal says.
Cutting emissions will help prevent the worst future warming scenarios, but the current reality is already difficult to endure for many. And India’s deadly heat waves offer just one example of who will be most affected by a changing climate.
“Here are 1.4 billion people who will be affected by this heat wave, the majority of whom contributed very little to global warming,” Mondal says. “This phenomenon should put an end to the question of why people should care about climate change.”byCasey CrownhartSharePopularDeep DiveClimate changeHow Bitcoin mining devastated this New York townBetween rising electricity rates and soaring climate costs, cryptomining is taking its toll on communities.
The Green Future Index 2022A ranking of 76 economies on their progress and commitment toward building a low-carbon future.
This $1.5 billion startup promised to deliver clean fuels as cheap as gas. Experts are deeply skeptical.
Prometheus Fuels has struck deals to deliver millions of gallons of carbon-neutral fuel. But it’s years behind schedule, and some doubt it can ever achieve its claims.
These plastic batteries could help store renewable energy on the gridStartup PolyJoule wants to expand grid storage beyond lithium batteries.
Stay connectedGet the latest updates fromMIT Technology ReviewDiscover special offers, top stories, upcoming events, and more.
Thank you for submitting your email!It looks like something went wrong.
We’re having trouble saving your preferences. Try refreshing this page and updating them one more time. If you continue to get this message, reach out to us atcustomer-service@technologyreview.comwith a list of newsletters you’d like to receive.
MIT Technology ReviewOur in-depth reporting reveals what’s going on now to prepare you for what’s coming next.
Subscribeto support our journalism.
AboutHelp© 2022 MIT Technology Review
