old id = 332
A UK Startup Is Building 200 Flying Taxi Hubs Around the World
2021
https://singularityhub.com/2022/01/26/a-uk-startup-is-building-200-flying-taxi-hubs-around-the-world

A UK Startup Is Building 200 Flying Taxi Hubs Around the WorldAt theConsumer Electronics Showin Vegas two years ago, Hyundai and Uber unveiled an air taxi concept they’d partnered on, claiming people would be riding in the flying vehicles by 2030. Now Hyundai has taken an important step towards making that prediction a reality. The company just invested in a British startup called Urban-Air Port, which has plans to build 200 hubs for flying taxis in 65 different cities over the next 5 years.
In November 2021 Hyundaiannouncedthat its Urban Air Mobility Division was becoming a new subsidiary calledSupernal. Supernal is developing a family of electric air vehicles, with plans to launch its first commercial flight in 2028, and announced last week that it hadbought a minority stakein Urban-Air Port. The company hopes to scale its operations—that is, they’re envisioning a near future whereair taxisglide across city skies in much the same way rideshare vehicles zoom around city streets.
All that gliding won’t do much good, though, if the vehicles don’t have dedicated takeoff and landing sites. For people to start using air taxis, they’ll need to offer not just speed, but convenience. Airports tend to be located at least a half-hour drive from urban centers, and a key function ofair taxiswill be to act as, well, taxis—that is, providing transportation not only between cities, but from point A to point Bwithincities, be it from home to the office (if that ever becomes a thing again), from the airport to a client meeting, from one medical center to another, etc.
“If it’s far away and hard to get to, it won’t be used,” Ricky Sandhu, Founder and Executive Chairman of Urban-Air Port toldSingularity Hubin an email. “If it’s right downtown opposite the train station, 60 seconds from the city center or your office, it will be used and will become routine.”Taxis or ride hailing services can drop riders off anywhere in a city because the infrastructure is there: roads. Not so for air taxis, and to make them truly feasible as a transit method, cities will need more than just two or three “vertiports.” That’s what Urban-Air Port is calling its hubs, since the vehicles that utilize them will take off and land vertically, like a drone or helicopter. They won’t need runways, which will make it easier to find viable locations to put the vertiports—though based on the company’s teaser video, they won’t be plopping these things down on top of high-rises.
The lotus-flower-like design looks like it will require at least a full city block’s worth of space. The company says an Urban-Air Port is 60 percent smaller than a traditional heliport, can be installed in days, can be easily relocated if needed, and is net-zero on carbon emissions.
Air-One, the company’s first hub, is scheduled to open in April in Coventry, UK. The vertiport was built in partnership with Munich Airport International, and itsgoal is“to demonstrate an ultra-compact, rapidly deployable, multi-functional operations hub for manned and unmanned vehicles.” Besides passenger vehicles, the vertiports will also be for cargo-carrying drones. Air-One will trialheavy-lift droneswith a maximum take-off weight of over 125 kilograms (275 pounds); it will be the first time this type of drone operates within a populated area.
Despite its seemingly slow growth, analysts predict that the global urban air mobility market will reach a value of $12.4 billion by 2027, almost double its 2020 value of $6.4 billion. Urban-Air Port’swebsiteasserts that lack of ground infrastructure is “the largest single constraint to sustainable air mobility.”Sandhu emphasized that vertiports will focus on the customer experience, aiming to make flying a more seamless and pleasant journey than it currently is. Airports and helipads “have vast swathes of tarmac, which slows the vehicle and passenger processing times and impacts capacity and in turn uptake and costs,” he said. “The passenger experience has never been important. For EVTOL, [the] technology allows for an entirely new form of infrastructure and experience, and that’s what we are focused on.”The company hasn’t shared details about specific cities for the 200 vertiports it plans to build, but did say the UK, US, France, Germany, Scandinavia, Australia, South Korea, and Southeast Asia are all on the list. It might do well to include China, Japan, and Canada, as themarketfor urban air mobility is expected to grow significantly in those countries over the next decade.
It will be a few years yet before you can look up and see a flying taxi crossing the sky, but with Urban-Air Port’s initiative, when you do see them you’ll know they have a place to land.
Image Credit:Urban-Air PortLooking for ways to stay ahead of the pace of change? Rethink what’s possible.
Join a highly curated, exclusive cohort of 80 executives for Singularity’s flagship Executive Program (EP), a five-day, fully immersive leadership transformation program that disrupts existing ways of thinking. Discover a new mindset, toolset and network of fellow futurists committed to finding solutions to the fast pace of change in the world.
Click here to learn more and apply today!Follow Vanessa:LatestThis Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through May 21)Volvo and DHL Are Partnering on Hub-to-Hub Autonomous TruckingHow a Volcanic Bombardment in Ancient Australia Led to the World’s Greatest Climate CatastropheRELATEDDemocracy Is Ailing. Here’s How We Can Start Reviving ItThe Ideal Qubit? Future Quantum Computers Could Crunch Data With Single Electrons on Neon IceBlasting Out Earth’s Location in Hopes of Reaching Aliens Is Controversial—Two Teams of Scientists Are Doing It AnywayHow the Extinction of Ice Age Mammals May Have Forced Us to Invent CivilizationGet the latest news from Singularity Hub!Singularity University, Singularity Hub, Singularity Summit, SU Labs, Singularity Labs, Exponential Medicine, Exponential Finance and all associated logos and design elements are trademarks and/or service marks of Singularity Education Group.
© 2022 Singularity Education Group. All Rights Reserved.
Singularity University is not a degree granting institution.
