old id = 1168
Events
2021
https://ainowinstitute.org/events

Recent eventsPublic AppearanceEthical, Legal & Social Implications of machine learning in genomics | National Human Genome Research Institute | Varoon Mathur/ April 13, 2021Workshops and EventsWhistleblower Aid + AI Now: How Tech Workers Can Blow the Whistle Workshop/ March 25, 2021Ifeoma Ozoma, Veena Dubal, Meredith Whittaker from the AI Now Institute and John Tye from Whistleblower Aid for a tech-worker focused webinar, covering the basics of safe whistleblowing and your rights as a worker.
All EventsFilter byDatePublic AppearanceDistinguished Speaker Series: AI and Inequalities – Creating Change | Hariri Institute for Computing, Boston UniversityHariri Institute for Computing / March 05, 2021Panel on AI, Inequality, and Big Tech, featuring Timnit Gebru, Sabelo Mhlambi and Meredith WhittakerPublic AppearanceMontreal AI Ethics Insitute's The State of AI Ethics Panel (Dec 2020)Montreal / December 02, 2020Public AppearanceNational Science Policy Symposium 2020 Panel: Systemic Barriers in Equity and Access to TechnologyNational Science Policy Symposium / November 14, 2020Sarah Myers West spoke together with Nicol Turner-Lee, and Tyrone Grandison. Technology is an integral part of our everyday lives through broad-band internet usage, protection of cyber-security security, or the usage of artifical intelligence (AI) to mimic human-operations. Historically, technology has perpetuated racial discrimination with biases in algorthims used in...
Public AppearanceVisual Activism: Erin McElroy | UC Berkeley Arts Research Center/ November 03, 2020Public AppearanceDiscriminating Systems: Gender, Race and Power in Artificial Intelligence at the Indiana University Informatics ColloquiumIndiana University / October 30, 2020Sarah Myers West gave a colloquium talk about discrimination in artificial intelligence for Indiana University's Informatics Colloquium. The artificial intelligence industry is in the midst of a crisis in diversity and inclusion: while the representation of women in computer science recently fell below levels in the 1960s, inclusion across lines...
Public AppearanceInformal Livelihoods and the Gig Economy | Amit Basole and Noopur Raval | Rethinking Economics India/ October 03, 2020Public AppearanceAmbivalence in the (Private) Public Sphere: How Global Digital Activists Navigate RiskRoyal Holloway University of London Information Security Group / July 30, 2020Sarah Myers West presented on a qualitative research project examining how digital activists navigate risks posed to them in online environments.
Public AppearanceNYC School of Data 2020New York City, NY / March 07, 2020BetaNYC hosts NYC School of Data 2020 at CUNY School of Law in Queens. This event, held on International Open Data Day 2020, concludes the fourth annual NYC Open Data Week. NYC School of data is a community driven conference with a focus on open data, civic technology, and service...
Public AppearanceJoy Lisi Rankin at the United Nations Women's "Counted and Visible" ConferenceNew York City, USA / March 03, 2020Dr. Joy Lisi Rankin, Research Lead at AI Now Institute, recently spoke about bias, algorithmic technologies and surveillance at the UN's "Counted and Visible" Conference.
Community EventAI Now Thursdays: Ryan Moritz: Important Bird OperaAI Now Institute / February 27, 2020Important Bird Opera (music, photographs, and film by Ryan Moritz with a libretto by Anjuli Fatima Raza Kolb) is an experimental opera in three acts about birds, migration, climate crisis, and rewilding. The piece began as a research project and experiment in nature photography, sound documentary, and the twentieth-century tone...
Public AppearanceTestimony to the European Parliament's Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs (LIBE) Committee Hearing on AI in Criminal LawBrussels, Belgium / February 20, 2020Our Executive Director (Former) Andrea Nill Sánchez testified before the European Parliament on the risks and harms associated with predictive policing systems.
Public AppearanceImagining a post GDPR order: Panel at CPDP 2020Brussels, Belgium / February 18, 2020Amba Kak presented on a panel on the future of data protection law and algorithmic accountability at CPDP 2020Public AppearanceFacial Recognition Technology (Part III): Ensuring Commercial Transparency & AccuracyWashington D.C. / January 15, 2020Learn more about the steps Congress should take to mitigate the harmful effects of AI and facial recognition tech.
Community EventAttorneys of Color Happy HourAI Now Institute / December 16, 2019AI Now hosted a gathering of NYC-area attorneys of color in honor of the MLK holiday.
Workshops and EventsCommunity Forum on Algorithmic BiasNew York, NY / December 07, 2019AI Now and several other organizations partnered with NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund (LDF) to host a Community forum on algorithmic bias in connection with the publication of Confronting Black Boxes: A Shadow Report on the New York City Automated Decision System Task Force.
Community EventAI Now Thursdays: White Gaze: Michelle Dizon & Việt LêAI Now Institute / November 22, 2019AI Now Fridays creates space for discussion, exploration, and insight. Each event will feature a short talk, followed by casual conversation. Held on the last Friday of every month, this edition featured artists Michelle Dizon and Viet Le.
Workshops and EventsLitigating Algorithms EU 2019Berlin, Germany / November 14, 2019The workshop, co-hosted with the Digital Freedom Fund in Berlin, brought together European and North American litigators with experience in cases at the intersection of automated/algorithmic decision-making and human rights. The aim of the workshop was to facilitate the sharing of lessons learned from already-existing cases, while helping those at...
Workshops and EventsTraining Humans SymposiumMilan, Italy / October 26, 2019The Training Humans Symposium engaged with the themes of Training Humans, the first major photography exhibition devoted to training images: the collections of photos used by scientists to train artificial intelligence (AI) systems in how to “see” and categorize the world. Featuring Prof. Stephanie Dick, Prof. eden Medina, and Prof....
AI Now Symposia2019 SymposiumNYU Skirball Center, New York, NY / October 02, 2019The fourth annual AI Now Symposium provided behind-the-scenes insights from those at the frontlines of the growing pushback against harmful AI. Our program featured leading lawyers, organizers, scholars, and tech workers, all of whom have engaged creative strategies to combat exploitative AI systems across a wide range of contexts, from...
Public AppearanceHuman Rights and Digital Technologies: A Symposium of Scholars and PractionersWashington, D.C. / September 28, 2019U.S. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine hosted a public symposium on human rights and digital technologiesCommunity EventBook Launch: The Costs of Connection: How Data Is Colonizing Human Life and Appropriating It for Capitalism with Nick Couldry and Ulises MejíasAI Now Institute / September 12, 2019In their new book, The Costs of Connection: How Data Colonizes Human Life and Appropriates it for Capitalism (Stanford University Press, August 2019). Couldry and Mejias argue that the role of data in society needs to be grasped as not only a development of capitalism, but as the start of...
Community EventDeveloping an Indigenous Data Science PlatformAI Now Institute / September 09, 2019We hosted a talk by Māui Hudson, Associate Professor in the Faculty of Māori and Indigenous Studies at the University of Waikato, titled Developing an Indigenous Data Science Platform. Presented in collaboration with NYU Native Studies Forum; NYU Department of Anthropology; NYU Center for Media, Culture, and History; and Local...
Workshops and EventsAI Vulnerabilities: An Integral Look at Security for AIAI Now Institute / August 22, 2019This workshop convened both practitioners from the more traditional software security world, and those developing AI systems, researchers studying AI security and vulnerability, and researchers examining the social and ethical implications of AI. AI systems can be exploited by a variety of triggers, from outright adversarial attacks, to bugs, to...
Community EventQX Meetup Presents: AI JusticeAI Now Institute / July 18, 2019AI is in the news a lot today - and most of it is not good. From tools that classify people by race and gender to systems that try to “predict” future crimes based on racist police data sets, AI-driven systems seem to be classifying, dividing, and controlling people more...
Community EventAI Now Thursdays: Then and Now with Joan GreenbaumAI Now Institute / June 28, 2019AI Now Fridays creates space for discussion, exploration, and insight. Each event will feature a short talk, followed by casual conversation. Held on the last Friday of every month, this edition featured scholar and activist Joan Greenbaum.
Workshops and EventsLitigating Algorithms NYC 2019New York City, USA / June 21, 2019This workshop, co-hosted with NYU Law’s Center on Race, Inequality and the Law, brought together folks focused on litigating algorithmic decision-making in various areas of the law (from employment to social benefits to criminal justice) to discuss strategy, best practices, and exchange ideas about experiences and strategic thinking around litigation...
Community EventTech Policy Happy HourAI Now Institute / June 05, 2019TPHH is a gathering of folks working at the intersection of technology, law and policy. From advocates to policymakers, academics, journalists, and everything in between.
Community EventAI Now Thursdays: Kate Crawford and Meredith WhittakerAI Now Institute / May 31, 2019AI Now's Kate Crawford and Meredith Whittaker will kick off this inaugural AI Now Friday, discussing AI Now's history, their recent work, and some of the challenges they see on the horizon.
Community EventBook Launch: Tero Karppi's DisconnectAI Now Institute / April 19, 2019Disconnect: Facebook’s Affective Bonds (University of Minnesota Press, 2018) is a book about the risk each social media platform faces and needs to respond. It centers on the idea that the different functions and services of social media are not built for the sake of connecting people but to prevent...
Workshops and EventsDisability Bias and AIAI Now Institute / March 28, 2019This workshop brought together a small group of experts from academia, industry and civil society to start a conversation on issues around the intersection of disability, bias, and AI, and to identify areas where more research is urgently needed. AI systems are proliferating and being deployed across core social institutions,...
AI Now Symposia2018 SymposiumNYU Skirball Center, New York, NY / October 16, 2018The AI Now 2018 Symposium addressed the intersection of AI, ethics, organizing, and accountability–examining the landmark events of the past year that have brought these topics squarely into focus. What can we learn from them and where is there more work to be done?Public AppearanceThe New Age of Innovation: Government's Role in Artificial IntelligenceWashington D.C., USA / July 11, 2018Policy director Rashida Richardson discusses regulation of AI and its use in government on a panel alongside two members of congress and the head of the IT Industry Council.
Workshops and EventsMachine Learning, Inequality and Bias RoundtableBerlin, Germany / July 03, 2018Our roundtable on Machine Learning, Inequality and Bias, co-hosted in Berlin with the Robert Bosch Academy, gathered researchers and policymakers from across Europe to address issues of bias, discrimination, and fairness in machine learning and related technologies.
Workshops and EventsLitigating Algorithms WorkshopNew York, NY / June 22, 2018AI Now partnered with NYU Law’s Center on Race, Inequality and the Law and the Electronic Frontier Foundation to host a first of its kind workshop that examined current United States courtroom litigation where the use of algorithms by government was central to the rights and liberties at issue in...
Public AppearanceAccountability in the Age of Artificial IntelligenceNew York, NY / February 21, 2018Recently, the New York City Council passed the first general algorithmic-accountability legislation in the country. At the same time, the European Union has been moving forward on its own data accountability regime per the new General Data Protection Regulation. But what does it mean to hold a machine accountable? With...
Workshops and EventsData Genesis Working GroupNew York, NY / January 25, 2018The Data Genesis Working Group convenes experts from across industry and academia to examine the mechanics of dataset provenance and maintenance.
Workshops and EventsConvening on Immigration, Data, and Automation in the Trump EraNew York, NY / September 15, 2017Our workshop on Immigration, Data, and Automation in the Trump Era, co-hosted with the Brennan Center for Justice and the Center for Privacy and Technology at Georgetown Law, focused on the Trump Administration’s use of data harvesting, predictive analytics, and machine learning to target immigrant communities.
AI Now Symposia2017 SymposiumMIT Media Lab, Cambridge, MA / July 10, 2017The second annual AI Now Symposium deepened the examination of the near-term social and economic implications of AI begun during the first Symposium, addressing four key issues in relation to AI: Rights and Liberties, Labor and Automation, Bias and Inclusion, and Ethics and Governance. These themes built on the work...
AI Now Symposia2016 SymposiumNYU Skirball Center, New York, NY / July 07, 2016In July of 2016, Kate Crawford and Meredith Whittaker co-chaired the first AI Now Symposium in collaboration with the Obama White House’s Office of Science and Technology Policy and the National Economic Council. The event brought together leading experts and members of the public to discuss the near-term social and...
Public AppearanceAI and Ethics: People, Robots and Society at Transformers: Artificial Intelligence | Washington Post LiveWashington, D.C. /SectionsA research institute examining the social implications of artificial intelligenceThis work is licensed under aCreative Commons Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
