old id = 1180
A New AI Lexicon
2021
https://medium.com/a-new-ai-lexicon

309 FollowersAI Now Institute·Dec 16, 2021A New AI Lexicon: Algorithm TroubleTroublesome Encounters with Algorithms that go Beyond Computational Processes — A guest post by Axel Meunier, Jonathan Gray and Donato Ricci. Axel is a PhD candidate in design at Goldsmiths, University of London. Jonathan is Senior Lecturer in Critical Infrastructure Studies at Department of Digital Humanities, King’s College London. Donato is designer and researcher at Sciences Po médialab, Paris.
10 min readAI Now Institute·Dec 16, 2021A New AI Lexicon: C is for ConsentAn exploration of Aadhaar, India’s National Biometric ID System, and the bureaucratisation of consent — A Guest Post by Praavita Kashyap. Follow Praavita on Twitter here. This essay is part of our ongoing “AI Lexicon” project, a call for contributions to generate alternate narratives, positionalities, and understandings to the better known and widely circulated ways of talking about AI. The collection of vast amounts of…7 min readAI Now Institute·Dec 15, 2021A New AI Lexicon: GenderTransgender erasure in AI: Binary gender data redefining ‘gender’ in data systems — A guest post by Brindaalakshmi. K. Brindaa is an intersectional queer-feminist writer, researcher and advocacy professional. They work at the intersection of human rights, identities, and technology. …13 min readAI Now Institute·Dec 15, 2021Heikeji 黑科技 [‘black technology’]Opacity and incomprehensibility in Chinese innovation — A guest post by Gabriele de Seta. Gabriele is technically a sociologist and currently a Postdoctoral Researcher at the University of Bergen. This essay is part of our ongoing “AI Lexicon” project, a call for contributions to generate alternate narratives, positionalities, and understandings to the better known and widely circulated…10 min readAI Now Institute·Dec 10, 2021A New AI Lexicon: Exporting AIAI/ML models are curiously everywhere and nowhere. — A guest post by Yung Au. Yung is a doctoral researcher at the Oxford Internet Institute (OII) and a Clarendon Scholar. Her research explores (re)coloniality of tech, surveillance, and verticalities. Twitter: @a_yung_ This essay is part of our ongoing “AI Lexicon” project, a call for contributions to generate alternate narratives…12 min readAI Now Institute·Dec 10, 2021A New AI Lexicon: VoiceWhat’s in a voice? AI voice assistants and the implications of chasing an impossible technical imaginary — A guest post by Levin Kim. Levin (they/them) is a PhD student at the University of Washington exploring the intersection(s) of technology, bodies, and power through a variety of practices, including academic research, art, and community organizing. This essay is part of our ongoing “AI Lexicon” project, a call for…11 min readAI Now Institute·Nov 11, 2021A New AI Lexicon: ‘Caste’AI-based policing: a veneer of neutrality to India’s casteist criminal justice system — A guest post by Nikita Sonavane & Srujana Bej. Nikita Sonavane is a lawyer and co-founder of the Criminal Justice and Police Accountability (CPA) Project. Srujana Bej is a lawyer and human rights researcher. …10 min readAI Now Institute·Nov 4, 2021A New AI Lexicon: Social good‘AI for Social Good,’ is everywhere, but who is it good for? — A guest post by Doaa Abu-Elyounes and Karine Gentelet. Doaa is an Affiliated Researcher at the Berkman Klein Center for Internet and Society at Harvard University, a Postdoctoral Researcher with the Chair on AI and Justice at ENS in Paris and working at UNESCO on AI ethics. Karine is an…14 min readAI Now Institute·Oct 29, 2021A New AI Lexicon: HumanExploring the Boundaries of Humans and Machines — A guest post by Laura Forlano. Laura, a Fulbright award-winning and National Science Foundation-funded scholar, is a writer, social scientist, and design researcher. She is an Associate Professor of Design at the Institute of Design at Illinois Institute of Technology. Twitter: @laura4lano This essay is part of our ongoing “AI…10 min readAI Now Institute·Oct 28, 2021A New AI Lexicon: VoiceThe Legacies and Limits of Automated Voice Analysis — A guest post by Beth Semel. Beth is a Postdoctoral Associate in the Anthropology Department at MIT, where she co-founded and serves as the Associate Director of the Language and Technology Lab. Twitter: @bethmsemel This essay is part of our ongoing “AI Lexicon” project, a call for contributions to generate…9 min readA New AI Lexicon: Responses and Challenges to the Critical AI discourseConnect with A New AI LexiconEditorsAI Now InstituteResearching the social implications of artificial intelligence now to ensure a more equitable futureHelpStatusWritersBlogCareersPrivacyTermsAboutKnowable
