old id = 1802
Privacy Policy - Future plc
2021
https://www.futureplc.com/privacy-policy

Privacy PolicyContentsINTRODUCTIONThis policy covers the processing of personal data by Future plc, whose registered address is at Quay House, The Ambury, Bath, BA1 1UA, and its associated Group companies (“Future”, “we” or “us”). Future is committed to protecting the privacy of your personal information whilst striving to provide the very best user experience. We want our websites to be safe and enjoyable for everyone. Under the UK General Data Protection Regulation 2021 (GDPR),the Data Protection Act 2018and related laws, we have a legal duty to protect the personal information we collect from you. GDPR says that ‘personal data’ is any information relating to a living individual who can be identified, either directly or indirectly, from that information. This could include your name, email address, postal address or telephone number, or information collected online and used to identify you.
For the purposes of GDPR, the ‘Data Controller’ for Future services based in the UK iseither Future Publishing Limited or Gocompare.com Limited (clickherefor more information on how GoCompare uses your data). For all services based in the United States, the Data Controller is Future US LLC, and in Australia it is Future Publishing (Overseas) Limited. As Data Controller we are responsible for, and control, the processing of your personal data for the purposes of Future’s services.
CONTACT DETAILSWe have appointed a data protection officer (DPO) to oversee our data protection and privacy practices. If you have any comments, concerns or questions, including any requests to exercise your legal rights, you can contact our DPO.
By email: dpo@futurenet.comBy telephone: +44 (0)1225 442244By post: Data Protection Enquiries, Future Publishing Limited, Quay House, The Ambury, Bath, BA1 1UAIt would be very helpful for us if you could include your full name, your postcode, details of the service you are using and/or magazine subscription information when contacting us.
WHAT DATA DO WE COLLECT AND HOW DO WE USE IT?For more detailed information about the analytics companies we work withpleaseclick hereeCommerceWHAT LAWFUL BASIS DO WE RELY ON FOR PROCESSING?In order to process your personal data, we must have a lawful reason for doing so. GDPR sets out six lawful bases under which organisations can collect, use and store personal data. We rely on four of the lawful bases:Necessary for the performance of a contractIf you are our customer, for example a subscriber of a magazine or an attendee at one of our events, we will process your personal data on the basis that it is necessary for us to provide our products and services to you.
ConsentIn some instances we rely on your specific consent to process your personal information. This is where you have actively agreed and ‘opted-in’, for example to receive marketing communications from us, and you have the right to withdraw your consent at any time.
Compliance with lawsWe may have to process and share your personal data in order to comply with our legal obligations, or to protect our rights or the rights of others. For example, we are required to collect certain information from you when processing your subscription payment for tax or financial reporting reasons.
Legitimate interestsIn some situations we rely on our legitimate business interests in order to collect and use your personal data. In these situations, we have conducted a balancing test to carefully consider the impact of the processing on your interests, rights and freedoms. We will only undertake the processing if we are satisfied there is no negative impact on you. We rely on Legitimate Interests for the following activities:If you object to our reliance on Legitimate Interests for any purpose pleasecontact our DPO.
WHO MAY WE SHARE YOUR DATA WITH?AgentsWe use third parties to perform certain functions on our behalf including fulfilling orders, sending emails, organising and managing events, running competitions and promotions, conducting surveys or polls, removing repetitive information from customer lists, comment hosting, website analysis, data analysis, and processing credit card payments. They will have access to your personal information if necessary to perform their function but they cannot use it or disclose it for any other purpose unless you have specifically given them consent to do so.
Auditing organisationsWe may share your personal data with the Audit Bureau of Circulations, a third-party auditing organisation. This is so they can verify aggregated statistics about circulation and usage of our products, or review our policies, processes and procedures for compliance with relevant standards. You can view their privacy policy by following this link:www.abc.org.uk/privacy-policyAggregate InformationWe may share aggregated, non-personally identifiable information, such as demographics and website usage statistics, with advertisers, sponsors, and other organisations.
Option to receive marketing information from associated third partiesThroughout the website, you may be given the opportunity to receive marketing information that may be of interest to you from associated third parties. Only if you elect to receive such information, will we share your personal information with our associated third parties, and they are only permitted by us to use it for the purpose of providing you with the marketing information you have requested. The use of your personal information by such third parties will be subject to their own privacy policy and practices. We are not responsible for the privacy policy or practices of any such third party. If you do not want to receive marketing information from associated companies you can notify us of this as part of the registration process. You can stop receiving this information at any time by following the unsubscribe instructions on the correspondence you receive, by amending your marketing preferences, or by emailing our DPO at dpo@futurenet.com giving your email address and details of the information you no longer wish to receive.
Products or services offered in partnership with third partiesCertain products or services available through this website may be provided to you in partnership with a third party. That third party may require you to disclose personal information to them in order to receive such products or services. If you request a product or service offered in partnership with a third party, the identity of the third party will be disclosed to you and your personal information will be transferred to that third party. The use of your personal information by that third party is subject to its privacy policy and practices and we are not responsible for this.
Group companiesFuture Group companies may use and share the information you provide, and other information held about you, for the purposes set out in this Policy. For more information about the Future Group please see theFuture website. For more information seeHow we work with group companies.
Changes in ownershipIf we sell any parts of our business, for example a website or a magazine, we may have to share your personal data with the purchaser. For example, to enable them to continue providing a subscription or other service to you. The new owners will use your personal data as set out in their Privacy Policy.
Ad serving plus measurement and reporting servicesWe may use a third-party network advertiser to serve the advertisements on this website. Network advertisers are third parties that display advertisements based on your visits to this website and other websites you have visited. This third-party ad serving enables us to target advertisements to you for products or websites you might be interested in. We may also use an audience or traffic measurement service to analyse the traffic on this website. Audience and traffic measurement services allow us to collect traffic and behavioural information from the website by monitoring anonymous visitor activity. This website’s advertisers, sponsors and/or traffic measurement services may themselves set and access their own cookies on your computer if you choose to have your cookies enabled in your browser. Please seeWhat data is collected on our websites?and ourCookies Policyfor further details and information on opting out.
Advertisers and advertising networksWe may also share de-identified information and/or aggregated information with a third party who is helping us select and deliver interesting and relevant advertising to you and/or other potential customers. This includes sharing data with advertising networks and search engines, in order for us to deliver relevant advertising to you, based on what you appear to be interested in. For example when you are searching for information or browsing other sites.
This could also be in the form of an anonymous data segment or an online identification code called a privacy-protective identifier. (A privacy-protective identifier is where we convert the original information, such as an email address or phone number, into a value to keep the original information from being revealed).
These third parties may use this code to link demographic or interest-based information you have provided in your interactions with them in order to limit the number of times you see a particular ad, enable interest-based content or provide you with targeted advertising. You have the right to express a choice regarding our sharing of this data for the above purposes; of the creation of this code or of our sharing of the code with our advertising partners.
Behavioural remarketing servicesAfter you have visited our site, we may use remarketing services provided by companies such as Facebook and Google and Bing, to show you advertising on third-party websites, based on your browsing patterns and interactions. For this purpose, visitors are grouped by certain actions on our services, for example, by duration of visit. This enables us to understand your preferences and to show you personalised advertising even if you are currently on another website within the network.
Social mediaWe may also share de-identified information with social media platforms. For example,we may share a hashed, non-identifiable version of your email with, for example, Facebook or Google, with the aim of showing you advertising on those platforms. Alternatively, we may use this data with the aim of excluding you from seeing our advertising on those platforms. We only share data in this way if you have agreed to receive marketing communications from us. Our ability to subsequently tailor (or exclude) ads in this way are determined by your account settings on those platforms.
When we share information with third parties, we only permit them to process this data for specified purposes.We do not share more information with them than is necessary for the relevant purpose and we require them to treat this information with at least the same protection we do.
WHAT DATA IS COLLECTED ON OUR WEBSITES?‘Cookies’ are small data files which are sent to your computer, mobile phone or other device so that the website can remember information about your browsing activity. We use cookies on our websites for a variety of purposes:Information storage and accessThe storage of information, or access to information that is already stored, on your device such as advertising identifiers, device identifiers, cookies, and similar technologies.
Content selection, delivery, reportingThe collection of information, and combination with previously collected information, to select and deliver content for you, and to measure the delivery and effectiveness of such content. This includes using previously collected information about your interests to select content, processing data about what content was shown, how often or how long it was shown, when and where it was shown, and whether you took any action related to the content, including for example clicking on content. This does not include personalisation, which is the collection and processing of information about your use of this service to subsequently personalise content and/or advertising for you in other contexts, such as websites or apps, over time.
MeasurementWhen you visit our site we may collect information about your use of the content, and combine this with previously collected information, in order to measure, understand, and report on your usage of the service. This may include collectingcertain personal data about you for an online audience measurement project that analyses internet users’ behaviour and profile across different websites, applications and devices in the UK, working with IPSOS, a specialist research agency.
PersonalisationThe collection and processing of information about your use of this service to subsequently personalise advertising and/or content for you in other contexts, such as on other websites or apps, over time. Typically, the content of the site or app is used to make inferences about your interests, to help us to personalise your experience and show you more relevant content and advertising.
Ad selection, delivery, reportingThe collection of information, and combination with previously collected information, to select and deliver advertisements for you, and to measure the delivery and effectiveness of such advertisements. This includes using previously collected information about your interests to select ads, processing data about what advertisements were shown, how often they were shown, when and where they were shown, and whether you took any action related to the advertisement, including for example clicking an ad or making a purchase. This does not include personalisation, which is the collection and processing of information about your use of this service to subsequently personalise advertising and/or content for you in other contexts, such as websites or apps, over time.
Please see ourCookies Policyfor more information.
HOW WE WORK WITH GROUP COMPANIESFuture receives information from, and shares information with,other companies withinthe Future Group to help operate, provide, improve, understand, customise, support, and market our services and their offerings. This includes:In addition, akey way we share data across systems and Group companies is for advertising and targeting purposes. This can be based on your online behaviour on our sites, for example:Please note in the above scenarios where marketing is involved, the emails you receive will only be from Future, unless you have opted in to receive marketing from Group Companies.
LINKS TO OTHER WEBSITESOur websites may include links to third-party websites, plug-ins, and applications. Clicking on those links or enabling those connections may allow third parties to collect or share data about you. We do not control these third-party websites and, when you leave our website, we encourage you to read the privacy notice of every website you visit. We may monetise some of these links through the use of third-party affiliate programmes. These affiliate links help pay the costs of producing our websites and ensure that the content is free to you. However, it doesn’t mean that we are in any way indebted to Amazon or any other company. Nor do they or any other company have any influence over editorial coverage, how we rate products, or whether they get a positive review. Notwithstanding such affiliate programmes, we are not responsible for the content or privacy policies of these websites or for third-party advertisers, nor for the way in which they use the information they collect about you.
STORAGE AND RETENTION OF DATAYour information is collected and stored on our secure systems, mainly based in the UK and European Economic Area (EEA). Where we use third party service providers to store data, we have appropriate agreements in place to ensure that your personal data is protected.
We hold personal data for a variety of different purposes and the length of time we keep your data will vary depending on the services or products we are providing. We will only keep your data for a reasonable period of time, which is based on the purpose for which we are using your data. Once that purpose has been fulfilled, we will securely delete that data or anonymise your information (so that we, or anyone else, can no longer tell that data relates to you) unless we are required to retain the data longer for legal, tax or accounting reasons.
DATA SECURITYWe are committed to protecting the personal data we hold. In accordance with GDPR, we adopt appropriate technical and organisational measures to help prevent unauthorised access to your information and ensure data is held securely. We also require any third parties to whom we may transfer personal data to have appropriate security measures in place. We ask third parties to complete Data Security Questionnaires so we can be sure they are a safe place for your data.
INTERNATIONAL DATA TRANSFERYour personal data may be transferred to a country outside the UK or EEA if, for example, a supplier or service is based outside the UK or EEA. If such a transfer requires us to apply additional safeguards to your personal information under European data protection laws, we will do so. These steps include implementing the European Commission’s Standard Contractual Clauses for transfers of personal information to our service providers and business partners. To the extent applicable, we may rely on derogations as set forth in Article 49 of the GDPR for the transfer and onward transfer of personal information collected from individuals in the UK or EEA to the United States, and other countries that the EU views as not providing adequate data protection. Specifically, we may transfer such information to another party in accordance with our lawful basis for processing.
PROTECTING CHILDREN’S PRIVACYOur products and services are for a general audience and not aimed at children, although we recognise that some of our publications may appeal to a younger audience, for example in our Knowledge and Gaming portfolios. In addition, we have one brand, The Week Junior, which is specifically aimed at a younger audience. Across our portfolio, we have taken active measures to ensure we do not knowingly collect any personal information from children under the age of sixteen or send any marketing communications to children.
If we are running a competition, for example, which might be of interest to children, our competition rules specify that a parent or guardian must consent to entry (if the child is under eighteen). This also applies to other activities such as applying to participate in a TV show. You must also be at least eighteen to purchase products or services from us. If you are under the age of eighteen, you must ensure that your parent or guardian purchases the products or services on your behalf. This also applies when purchasing a subscription for The Week Junior.
If, in the future, we collect personally identifiable information from children in connection with our products and services, we will do so in compliance with all relevant laws and regulations including, without limitation, obtaining parental consent where necessary. The Internet offers children wonderful educational and entertainment resources. Your guidance and involvement are essential to help ensure that children have a safe and rewarding online experience. We encourage you to visithttps://www.google.co.uk/intl/en/safetycenter/families/start/for more information about keeping your family safe online. If you are a parent or guardian and are concerned that we may be processing personal data related to your child, pleasecontact our DPO.
SOCIAL MEDIA ACCOUNTSWe operate accounts on different social media platforms. If you visit one of our social media accounts we can usually only see information stored in your public profile on the social media platform, when you are logged in to your profile, while visiting our social media account; although we may process data that you provide to us when you contact us (for example: if you create a post, or send us a private message via Facebook).
If you visit one of our social media accounts, the operator of the social media platform also processes your data, regardless of whether you yourself have a profile on the platform. The social media platform also provides us with anonymous usage statistics, which we use to improve user experience. We do not have access to the usage data that the operator of the social network collects to create these statistics. For information on the social media operators and their privacy policies, pleaseclick here.
Certain sites offer services that require you to set up an account prior to receiving such services. To create a secure account you can use your email address and a password or, if the site offers a Facebook single-sign-on service, you will be able to register for and log-in to your account using your Facebook account. If you choose to use the Facebook single-sign-on service, you are granting permission to Facebook to share certain profile information with us. This may include your name, profile picture, and list of friends and any other information notified to you by Facebook prior to you completing the single-sign-on authorisation process. You control what social information you allow us to have access to using the privacy settings on the applicable media platform and any permissions you give as part of the single-sign-on authorisation process.
In addition, some social media platforms, such as Facebook, use cookies that are stored on your terminal device when you visit our social media account, even if you do not have your own profile in the network or are not logged in. These cookies enable the social media platform to create user profiles based on your preferences and interests and to show you advertising tailored to these. For information on the cookies we use, pleaseclick here.
YOUR RIGHTSYou have the right to request:Your right to withdraw consentWhenever you have given us your consent to use your personal data, you have the right to change your mind at any time and withdraw that consent.
Where we rely on our legitimate interestIn cases where we are processing your personal data on the basis of our legitimate interest, you can ask us to stop for reasons connected to your individual situation. We must then do so unless we believe we have a legitimate overriding reason to continue processing your personal data.
Direct marketingYou have the right to stop the use of your personal data for direct marketing activity through all channels, or selected channels. We must always comply with your request. Remember, you can always stop direct marketing messages by clicking on an unsubscribe link in any of our emails or bycontacting our DPO.
This also applies if you have elected to receive marketing from Group companies.
Exercising your rightsIf you wish to exercise any of your rights please contact the Data Protection Officer:By post: Future Publishing Limited, Quay House, The Ambury, Bath BA1 1UA; orBy email: dpo@futurenet.com.
We may need to request specific information from you to help us confirm your identity and ensure your right to access your personal data (or to exercise any of your other rights). If you have authorised a third party to submit a request on your behalf, we will ask them to prove they have your permission to act. This is a security measure to ensure that personal data is not disclosed to any person who has no right to receive it. We may also contact you to ask you for further information in relation to your request. We try to respond to all legitimate requests within one month. Occasionally it may take us longer than a month if your request is particularly complex or you have made a number of requests. If this is the case, we will notify you and keep you updated.
No fee usually requiredYou will not usually have to pay a fee to access your personal data (or to exercise any of the rights), however, we may charge a reasonable fee if your request is unfounded, repetitive or excessive. Alternatively, we may refuse to comply with your request in these circumstances. If we choose not to action your request we will explain to you the reasons for our refusal.
CALIFORNIA PRIVACY RIGHTSThis section applies only to California residents. It describes how we collect, use and share Personal Information of California residents in operating our business, and their rights with respect to that Personal Information. For purposes of this section, “Personal Information” has the meaning given in the California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018 (“CCPA”) but does not include information exempted from the scope of the CCPA.
Your California privacy rightsAs a California resident, you have the rights listed below. However, these rights are not absolute, and in certain cases we may decline your request as permitted by law.
How to exercise your right to information, access, deletionYou may exercise your California privacy rights by submitting arequest formor emailing dpo@futurenet.com quoting ‘California Privacy Rights-(insert name of Future Group brand)’ in the subject header and state which right(s) you wish to exercise.
How to exercise your right to opt-out of the “sale” of your Personal InformationFor internet and mobile users (online third parties). If you do not wish for us or our online third party partners (such as advertising networks) to sell your personal information to others, please click on the“Do Not Sell My Personal Information”link in the footer of the relevant website. If you access this site and/or app from other devices or browsers, or clear your cookies on your devices or browsers, you will need to indicate your preferences again from those devices or browsers.
For subscribers (offline third parties): If you want to opt-out of all offline third party sales, please email dpo@futurenet.com quoting “California Privacy Rights – [insert name of Future Group brand]” in the subject header and state ‘opt out of third party sales’.
We will need to confirm your identity and California residency to process your requests to exercise your rights. We cannot process your request if you do not provide us with sufficient detail to allow us to understand and respond to it.
Personal information that we collect, use and shareThe chart below summarizes how we collect, use and share Personal Information by reference to the statutory categories specified in the CCPA, and describes our practices during the 12 months preceding the effective date of this Privacy Policy.
For the glossaryof categories of personal information (as defined by the CCPA),click here.
Public sourcesBusiness partnersOur clientsResearch & developmentMarketingCompliance & OperationsAdvertising partnersService-related third partiesProfessional advisorsAuthorities and othersBusiness transfereesOur clientsResearch & developmentMarketingCompliance & OperationsService-related third partiesProfessional advisorsAuthorities and othersBusiness transfereesOur clientsResearch & developmentMarketingCompliance & OperationsService-related third partiesProfessional advisorsAuthorities and othersBusiness transfereesThird Party Partners (for business and commercial purposes as defined in the section above entitled‘Opt-out of sales’)Automatic collectionResearch & developmentMarketingCompliance & OperationsService-related third partiesProfessional advisorsAuthorities and othersBusiness transfereesPublic sourcesBusiness partnersOur clientsResearch & developmentMarketingCompliance & OperationsService-related third partiesProfessional advisorsAuthorities and othersBusiness transfereesWEBSITE NOTIFICATIONS (POP UPS)We provide news and updates about our sites via push notification messages or ‘pop-ups’. This is a free service. The notifications are only sent to you if you have clicked on a button to allow it (you may have accidentally selected to receive notifications).
We have no control over your subscription to notifications as it is controlled by your browser and device. We do not store any recognisable data about you or your device in connection with the push notification service.
If you wish to unsubscribe from receiving notifications please follow the instructions here:https://documentation.onesignal.com/docs/unsubscribe-from-notificationsIf you need additional assistance in relation to push notifications, please contact the team at push.notifications@futurenet.com.
POLICY CHANGESWe review this Privacy Policy annually and may also amend it from time to time, so we encourage you to check it periodically. If we make material changes we will endeavour to provide you with appropriate notice before such changes take effect.
FURTHER INFORMATIONGeneral information about data protection may be found at the Information Commissioner’s website:https://ico.org.uk/For more information about cookies please visithttp://www.allaboutcookies.org/and for more information about how to manage cookies please refer to ourCookies Policy.
Information about direct marketing may be found at the Direct Marketing Association’s website:https://dma.org.uk/To unsubscribe from all emails contact:dpo@futurenet.comIf you feel you need to, you also have the right to make a complaint at any time to the ICO, the UK data protection supervisory authority (www.ico.org.uk). We would, however, appreciate the chance to deal with your concerns before you approach the ICO so pleasecontact our DPOin the first instance.
