old id = 1838
Byron Reese | Author, Speaker, Entrepreneur
2021
https://byronreese.com

Byron ReeseEntrepreneur - Futurist - Technologist"Over the past decade, Reese has quietly pioneered a new breed of media company"“Byron Reese is typical of the new wave of internet entrepreneurs out to turn the economics of the media industry on its head.”"Reese is a tall Texan ... who created the idea-spawning algorithm that lies at the heart of Demand's process."“In fact, Reese says, good news has been trumping bad for some time: "We've cured childhood diseases, ended legal segregation, lengthened the average lifespan and improved the quality of life for millions of people."PRE-ORDER Byron's Latest BookSTORIES, DICE, AND ROCKS THAT THINKStories, Dice, and Rocks That Think: How Humans Learned to See the Future — and Shape it. What makes the human mind so unique? And how did we get this way?Byron in PrintMeet ByronWith 25 years as a successful tech entrepreneur, with multiple IPOs and exits along the way, Byron Reese is uniquely suited to comment on the transformative effect of technology on the workplace and on society at large. He writes books that explore the wonders of the world of tomorrow and delights audiences around the world with his vivid and energetic presentations on the future of work and life.
“The biggest problems of tomorrow will not be a lack of jobs but a shortage of humans to take advantage of all of the opportunities technology will offer.” – Byron ReeseByron in ActionWatch the Demo Reel above and get to know Byron via a personal introduction and select clips of previous talks.
Byron Keynotes Constellation Research Headliner Disruptor Event, October 26, 2021Byron delivers the speech 'Innovating in a Changing World," at #Maxx2020 Northwest Credit Union AssociationByron Discusses his new book WASTED on DisrupTV.
Byron speaks at The Time Machine Conference, presented by Spark Cognition in Austin, Texas, Nov 2019.
Byron discusses smart robots, conscious computers, and the future of humanity, and his new book "The Fourth Age," with TWIT's Fr. Robert Ballecer on Triangulation.
.
Byron Reese joins DisruptTV's hosts R “Ray” Wang and Vala Afshar for his fifth visit to discuss the future of #AI in 2020.
An interview with Byron on DisrupTV.
Byron's keynote at the PICNIC Festival in Amsterdam.
Byron presents "Achieving Greatness Is A Choice," at TEDxAustin.
Byron keynotes at CANHEIT, Canada's National Higher Ed IT Conference, hosted by Queen's University.
Byron speaks about "The Fourth Age," on C-SPAN.
Byron BNN Bloomberg interviewByron speaks about "The Fourth Age," with ZD Net.
Podcast and Radio InterviewsNickSav.showAn Interview on NickSav.com discussing how artificial intelligence affects our lives, the difference between narrow AI and general AI, whether being human is something more than a machine, challenges and philosophical questions raised by advancements in AI, why optimism matters and can make all the difference, and how AI might redefine creative workLISTENEveryday MBAAn Interview with Kevin Craine on Every Day MBA discussing"The Fourth Age", how AI makes humans smarter, andhow AI will change the job market.
LISTENNonprophets [Super] Forecasting PodcastAn interview with Atief, Robert, and Scott on the NonProphets podcast discussing "The Fourth age", the skills necessary for an AI filled future, where the fear of what AI will do comes from, and thoughts about consciousness and free will and the implications for robots and AI.
LISTENAssociation ForumAn Interview with Michelle Mason on Association Forum discussing "The Fourth Age", technologies effect on the future of work, the difference between narrow and general AI, and the need to be constantly learning.
LISTENRoboPsychAn Interview with Carla and Tom on Robopsych Podcast discussing "The Fourth Age", the anxiety of technological change, and what makes us human and comparing and contrasting with what AI could be.
LISTENThe Bad Crypto PodcastAn Interview with Joel and Travis on The Bad Crypto Podcast discussing "The Fourth Age", what is AI and what will it do to our jobs, how will AI and robots be used for war, and how will AI and robots effect our dignity.
LISTENTech it Out with Mark SaltzmanAn Interview with Marc Saltzman on Tech It Out discussing"The Fourth Age", what makes us human, and where technology could take us.
LISTENThe HoomanistAn Interview with Simone Salis on The Hoomanist discussing "The Fourth Age", technology multiplying human ability, can AI be creative, and how jobs will shift.
LISTENRadio New ZealandAn Interview on Radio New Zealand discussing "The Fourth Age", what we think of ourselves as humans and what that implies for AI, the concept of emergence, and the economic opportunity of AI.
LISTENAn Interview with James Kotecki on the Kotecki on Tech, discussing "The Fourth Age", the inevitability of technological progress, technological optimism vs pessimism, the disruption of jobs, and conscious computers.
LISTENNew Books NetworkAn Interview with Carrie Lynn Evans on the New Books Network, discussing Byron's book "The Fourth Age: Smart Robots, Conscious Computers and the Future of Humanity."LISTENDojoLIVE!An Interview on DojoLIVE! by Nearsoft, discussing Byron's book "The Fourth Age: Smart Robots, Conscious Computers and the Future of Humanity."WATCHWorkMinusAn Interview on WorkMinus, discussing Byron's thoughts on technology removing dehumanizing jobs, amplifying human productivity and other ideas from Byron's book "The Fourth Age: Smart Robots, Conscious Computers and the Future of Humanity."LISTENDM RadioDM Radio and Host Eric Kavanagh - Narrow AI: Artificial Intelligence and the Future of Work - Original Air Date: November 29, 2018 The Guests Stefan Groschupf, SalesHero Faisal Abid, Zoom.ai Byron Reese, Gigaom Micah Hollingworth, Broadway.ai About the Discussion Hollywood has it all wrong with respect to Artificial Intelligence (AI), at least for now.
LISTEN NOWTalks on TomorrowAutomation, AI, and the Future of WorkHow will automation reshape the workplace? Will robots take all the jobs? Will artificial intelligence displace human intelligence? Are we destined to a future where we work harder and harder for less and less?Futurist, author and technologist, Byron Reese dispels the fearful myths around these topics and describes a world where workers of all skill levels use new technology to increase their own productivity.
Byron explains, “Technology will continue to transform the workplace. That is certain. But it will do so by making humans more valuable. The biggest problems of tomorrow will not be a lack of jobs, but a shortage of humans to take advantage of all of the opportunities technology will offer.”While much of this talk focuses on how technology will reshape the workplace, Byron pays special attention to what workers can do today to maximize their productivity tomorrow. “A few simple rules,” he explains, “will help anyone position themselves to prosper in the world of tomorrow.”“Workers today should be no more fearful of AI and robots than our great grandparents should have been fearful of mechanization and electricity. Those devices changed the workplace, but they did so by empowering workers, not replacing them. This is what will happen this time as well.” - Byron ReeseRobots and JobsDaily, the media greets readers with a variant of “THE ROBOTS ARE COMING FOR YOUR JOB!” The logic is simple: Everyday robots get smarter, learn faster, and they will never ask for a raise. But Byron believes this simplistic reasoning is entirely wrong. "Just as electricity and the assembly line weren’t bad for workers, in spite of shrill predictions otherwise, AI and robots won’t be either," he says. "In fact, they will create so many new jobs that our bigger problem will be a labor shortage."Sharing insights from his upcoming book,"The Fourth Age: Smart Robots, Conscious Computers and the Future of Humanity,"released April of 2018 by Atria, an imprint of Simon & Schuster, Byron invites us to explore the many advances leading to today's technological age, and then to consider the vast possibilities of the future, the coming Fourth Age.
What skills will be useful to have in the future? Which technologies should we adopt? How will technology affect the workplace, the home, and society in general?Answering these questions, Byron suggests that the future is not going to be a frightening place where humans become displaced, but rather "one in which the things that make us human become incredibly valuable. We are entering a world of more choice and more opportunity than ever before," says Byron, and "the best response is to expand our dreams and expectations, not our fears and concerns."Attendees can expect to gain an understanding of:"When 90% of people farmed, the 10% that didn't undoubtedly looked upon those that did as capable of little else. The idea that those very people could become lab techs, marketing directors, and ice sculptors would have struck them as ludicrous. 'They are just plain farmers,' would have been the common retort. But people farmed because we needed farmers, not because that was all they could do. And I believe that a great part of the workforce needs to be liberated from the drudgery of doing the work a machine can do." - Byron ReeseThe Jobs of TomorrowWhile audience members once commonly asked, "What should I teach my kids to make sure they have a job in the future?” Byron says today they ask, "What do I need to learn to stay relevant in the future?" And, "How do I keep from falling behind?" Everyone agrees that technology is changing the world. The question is how should we change in response to it? In this talk, Byron tells the story of technology's advancement from the invention of language until today. He explores what's to come in the next decade, and examines what we as individuals can do to make the most of changing times.
What skills are useful to have in the future? Which technologies should we adopt? How will technology affect the workplace, the home, and society in general? In this empowering talk, Byron suggests that the future is not going to be a frightening place where humans become displaced, but rather "one in which the things that make us human become incredibly valuable.""We are entering a world of more choice and more opportunity than ever before, and the best response is to expand our dreams and expectations, not our fears and concerns." - Byron ReeseThese highly customizable talks may be tailored to specific industries or presented to a general audience.
How to Innovate in a Rapidly Changing WorldNo matter your industry, you probably have a sense that you are in one of those radical disruptive periods where everything seems to be changing. You may be wondering when it is all going to settle down so you can take a bit of a breather.
In this talk, futurist, author, and technologist, Byron Reese explores how businesses operating in industries undergoing dramatic changes can prosper and be successful. While traditional futurists seldom bridge the gap between “here is what is going to happen” and “here is how you capitalize on it,” Byron explores how it is that radical technology advancement creates new multi-billion dollar companies, and destroys old ones.
What would you have foreseen seven years ago? There were no self-driving cars or Apple watches. Would you have seen the transformative effect that tablets and smartphones would have? The next seven years will have much more change than the prior seven years. We know this. And this is the change for which we need to prepare.
Attendees can expect to learn:"Think about AT&T, 3M, NCR and Geico. They are all acronyms. And if you know what they stand for, you will notice something interesting: None of them simply do the thing that is in their name. These companies transformed themselves. And yet, why doesn’t Blockbuster own streaming video? Why doesn’t Kodak dominate in the digital camera world? These cases, and many more like it, are examples of entrenched companies failing to adopt a transformative technology." - Byron ReeseThese highly customizable talks may be tailored to specific industries or presented to a general audience.
The Fourth Age: Answering the Big Questions of TomorrowOur present age is grappling with big questions around technology: What is really possible with artificial intelligence? Should we fear it or welcome it? Will robots take all the jobs, and if they did, would that be a good thing? Can computers achieve consciousness, and if so, do they then acquire rights?In a talk from his upcoming book,"The Fourth Age: Smart Robots, Conscious Computers, and the Future of Humanity,"futurist, author, and technologist, Byron Reese identifies these as fundamentally philosophical, not technical, questions. Instead of telling the audience what he thinks, he teaches them how to apply their own beliefs and values to them to come up with their own answers.
Byron then proceeds to tell the story of technology over the last 100,000 years, focusing on three times in the past when we created a technology so profound that it permanently altered our bodies and minds, changing the trajectory of human history in a dramatic way. Byron believes that humanity is about to be so transformed a fourth time, due to artificial intelligence and robots.
"As humans progressively “outsource” our cognitive activity to computers and our physical activity to machines, once again we will be permanently changed, and in this Fourth Age, humanity will embark on the next stage of its evolution, towards a better world for everyone." - Byron ReeseThis talk overflows with reasoned optimism and is suitable for all audiences, as its focus is not specific technologies, but how to think about technology.
The Next Seven YearsWhat would you have foreseen seven years ago? There were no self-driving cars or Apple watches. Would you have seen the transformative effect that tablets and smartphones would have?"The next seven years will have much more change than the prior seven years. We know this. And this is the change we need to begin preparing for." - Byron ReeseThis talk overflows with reasoned optimism and is suitable for all audiences, as its focus is not specific technologies, but how to think about technology.
The Coming Golden Age of HumanityThe world has, throughout human history, changed. Almost always, this change is for the better. Through civilization, we have raised life expectancy, the standard of living, access to education, and political liberty. How has this change been brought about?Futurist, author, and technologist, Byron Reese explains the change is driven largely by the actions of individuals driven to change the world. This talk focuses on how that change happens and looks at how virtually any individual can literally have a worldwide effect on the history of the planet.
On this topic, Byron demonstrates how current technological changes will ultimately bring about the end of poverty, disease, hunger, ignorance, and war. Additionally, Byron explores how these historical problems of humanity are fundamentally problems of technology, and thus will have technological solutions, solutions we will find much sooner than is commonly believed.
Attendees can expect to learn:We are entering a world of more choice and more opportunity than ever before, and the best response is to expand our dreams and expectations, not our fears and concerns. - Byron ReeseThese highly customizable talks may be tailored to specific industries or presented to a general audience.
Education in the 21st CenturyHow should education change? How will it? What skills will ensure that a person can economically contribute in a world of radical technological change?In this talk, futurist, author, and technologist, Byron Reese answers these questions and explains that the University system is a 12th Century French invention that remains to this day largely unchanged from it origins in the Middle Ages. "Our K-12 system is a 19th Century German invention designed to produce homogenous factory workers," he says. "It too remains unchanged since the late 1800s. Now, we find ourselves in a world that has changed in ways no one expected. Now, the two most important job skills are the ability to independently learn new skills and working collaboratively with a team, neither of which are taught in our existing framework."Attendees can expect to learn:"Our world is full of countless institutions, each of which evolved over that long history to fill a specific purpose. The institutions upon which our world rests will play a big part in how the future unfolds."- Byron ReeseThese highly customizable talks may be tailored to specific industries or presented to a general audience.
Various PublicationsDeep Dive Into AI: Explainable Artificial IntelligenceDeep Dive Into AI: Limits of AIByron's BlogGary’s Book Club Features 2018’s Best Tech Books on CTA Stage at CES 2019National Geographic"How We Will Age Within 20 Years" by Byron ReeseKorn Ferry Institute Report - "Artificial Intelligence: Competitor or Partner"A World of Inspiration"A World of Inspiration," by Byron ReeseLatest BookGet in touch orBook a Talk HereGet in touch with ByronNameEmail AddressMessage© Copyright 2022 Byron Reese
