old id = 2064
2021: Arts, Culture and Heritage | African Union
2021
https://au.int/en/theme/2021/arts-culture-and-heritage

LanguagesWebmailAn Integrated, Prosperous and Peaceful Africa.
Top SlidesPromoting Africa’s growth and economic development by championing citizen inclusion and increased cooperation and integration of African states.
Promoting Africa’s growth and economic development by championing citizen inclusion and increased cooperation and integration of African states.
Agenda 2063 is the blueprint and master plan for transforming Africa into the global powerhouse of the future. It is the strategic framework for delivering on Africa’s goal for inclusive and sustainable development and is a concrete manifestation of the pan-African drive for unity, self-determination, freedom, progress and collective prosperity pursued under Pan-Africanism and African Renaissance.
H.E. Mr. Paul Kagame, President of the Republic of Rwanda, was appointed to lead the AU institutional reforms process. He appointed a pan-African committee of experts to review and submit proposals for a system of governance for the AU that would ensure the organisation was better placed to address the challenges facing the continent with the aim of implementing programmes that have the highest impact on Africa’s growth and development so as to deliver on the vision of Agenda 2063.
Root Menu - Work with UsThe AU offers exciting opportunities to get involved in determining continental policies and implementing development programmes that impact the lives of African citizens everywhere. Find out more by visiting the links on right.
SearchSearch formAdvanced SearchSearch2021: Arts, Culture and HeritageAbout the Theme of the Year 2021Aspiration 5 of Agenda 2063 envisions ‘An Africa with a strong cultural identity, common heritage, shared values and ethics’. This calls for an African cultural renaissance which is pre-eminent and that inculcates the spirit of Pan Africanism; tapping Africa’s rich heritage and culture to ensure that the creative arts are major contributors to Africa’s growth and transformation; and restoring and preserving Africa’s cultural heritage, including its languages.
Globally, the Cultural and Creative Industries (CCIs) play a key role in contributing to GDP. In recognition of the importance of CCIs in achieving the Agenda 2063 objectives of regional integration, inclusive and sustainable economic growth and development, the African Union declared the Year 2021 as“The AU Year of the Arts, Culture And Heritage: Levers for Building the Africa We Want”.
Culture incorporates social behaviour and norms of a society as well as the language, knowledge, beliefs, traditions, arts, customs, capacities and habits of a certain community and the 2021 Theme is a declaration at a continental level for member states to invest more resources in promoting national and regional cohesion by investing in African culture and heritage as a vehicle for promoting and achieving the national economic and social development goals outlined in Africa’s Agenda 2063.
The Year of Arts, Culture and Heritage is happening at a time when the continent is still grappling with the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic which has imposed heavy human, financial and economic costs to Africa. However, during the pandemic the Creative and Cultural Industries in Africa have played a key role in contributing efforts towards prevention and combating the spread of Covid-19 and furthermore the increased use of technology has created new spaces for CCIs sector to thrive by using digital platforms to promote their goods and services. The pandemic has provided an opportunity to re-examine the continent’s socio-economic priorities, including the role of cultural workers, towards contributing to building stronger and more resilient health and social sectors, promoting equality, inclusion, social cohesion and African Renaissance, as inspired by the Ubuntu Philosophy‘I AM because you are; You are because I Am’.
Activities and programmes to be implemented under the 2021 Theme will prioritise the following:ActivitiesWHAT:THE CONTINENTAL EXPERTS’ WORKSHOP ON THE RESTITUTION OF CULTURAL PROPERTY AND HERTheme: “Arts, Culture and Heritage: Levers for Building the Africa we Want”.
Theme: “Arts, Culture and Heritage: Levers for Building the Africa we Want”.
What: Meeting with Partners in the Arts, Culture and Heritage Sectors on the Launch of the Concept Note and Roadmap oSpeakers in the Virtual Event will include:MediaDiscoverMenu Theme of the Year: 2021 Arts, Culture and HeritageArts, Culture and HeritageAdvertsTopic ResourcesTheme: ‘Arts, Culture and Heritage: Levers for Building the Africa We Want’"Levers for Building the Africa We Want"Theme: ‘Arts, Culture and Heritage: Levers for Building the Africa We Want’"Levers for Building the Africa We Want"About the African UnionAn Integrated, Prosperous and Peaceful Africa, driven by its own citizens and representing a dynamic force in the global arena.
African Union HeadquartersP.O. Box 3243, Roosvelt Street W21K19Addis Ababa, EthiopiaTel: +251 11 551 77 00Fax: +251 11 551 78 44Follow UsOpportunitiesQuick links© The African Union CommissionSecondary Menu Footer
