old id = 497
Alumni
2021
https://www.fraunhofer.de/en

Where am I?Alumni at FraunhoferTo the member sectionInterview with Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingomar KelbassaProf. Dr.-Ing. Ingomar Kelbassa worked in Aachen for a number of years. He was deputy Chair for Laser Technology LLT at RWTH Aachen University and head of department at the Fraunhofer Institute for Laser Technology ILT. In 2016, he joined Siemens. There, he was most recently responsible for the Siemens subsidiary WEISS Spindeltechnologie in his capacity as managing director and was in charge of the research campus Werner-von-Siemens Centre for Industry and Science in Berlin.
Now the ILT alumnus is returning to the Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft — as institute director of the Fraunhofer Research Institution for Additive Manufacturing Technologies IAPT. However, for Prof. Ingomar Kelbassa, “return” is the wrong word to use — he always felt a connection to Fraunhofer, and research and development were key areas of focus for the mechanical engineer during his six years in the private sector. Now he wants to further industrialize additive manufacturing (AM) at the IAPT in new ways. Despite the move from Dortmund to Hamburg, he will remain a die-hard fan, club member and shareholder of the football club Borussia Dortmund.
To the interviewLooking back at the 5th Fraunhofer Alumni Summit “The Future of Logistics”Greater resilience, more sustainability and digitalization — the focus of the 2021 Fraunhofer Alumni Summit, which was held in hybrid format for the first time, was the future of logistics.
Ordered today, delivered tomorrow. This level of convenience has long been taken for granted in today’s consumer society. However, many essential factors are required in order to maintain this standard, one of the most important of which is stable supply chains. In today’s collaborative and highly networked world, disruptions to supply chains have far-reaching consequences. Logistics, therefore, is the backbone and “enabler” of society, and the supply bottlenecks in recent months are just the latest in a series of events that have increasingly brought it to the attention of the general public. At the same time, this industry has been gaining in societal and economic importance.
To the Review"Everything is fractal" - an interview with Dr. Ruth HoubertzAs a scientist and entrepreneur, Dr. Ruth Houbertz is the recipient of several awards, such as the Joseph von Fraunhofer Prize and the Fraunhofer Founder's Prize. She initially worked at the Fraunhofer Institute for Silicate Research ISC and used it as a base to found Multiphoton Optics GmbH. She wanted to revolutionize data transmission with this company's technology. And the physicist is still convinced today that many current challenges could be solved with optical data transmission. Even though she decided to sell the company at the beginning of 2021. In this interview, the Würzburg resident talks about the new "Society6.0" project and the reasons for the sale, her role in science and business and her role as founder. Above all - joy and enthusiasm should not be given short shrift.
To the interviewFraunhofer Alumni Charity Wine Tasting and Beer Tasting5. November | digitalThe Fraunhofer-Alumni Charity Tasting is going into another round after last year's great success. On Friday, November 5, 2021 at 6:30 p.m., Fraunhofer-Alumni e.V. will offer two alternative tastings in a digital format.
You order your tasting box according to your individual taste, enjoy the curated selection of wines or beers at your leisure from home and learn interesting facts from our experts in an entertaining way via live stream - German language.
Drink wine or beer and do good at the same time? Not possible? YES! To mark the occasion, we would like to support the Fraunhofer Executive Board's fundraising campaign for Fraunhofer employees affected by the disastrous floods.
You pay 59.90 euros for the Tasting Box, which includes shipping costs and a 5-euro donation.
Info and regsitrationWithout the Fraunhofer-Alumni-Award GreenUp Sahara would have starvedFor decades, tens of thousands of Sahrawis have been living in refugee camps in the middle of the Sahara. The GreenUp Sahara team is now developing systems to grow vegetables in this hostile environment and thus improve the nutritional situation in these camps. Despite strong competition from the other outstanding projects, the GreenUp Sahara project won the Fraunhofer Alumni Award by a wide margin of the votes of the Fraunhofer alumni and received the prize money of 10,000 euros. In this interview, Marc Beckett, an expert in water technologies and resource recovery at the Fraunhofer Institute for Interfacial Engineering and Biotechnology IGB in Stuttgart, explains what the challenges are and what further steps are now being taken. He also describes the adverse living conditions of the people in the camps.
To theinterviewBeyond mp3 - Karlheinz Brandenburg on his new projectFinding an inductee into the “Internet Hall of Fame” among the ranks of Fraunhofer alumni is no surprise: Prof. Dr.-Ing. Dr. rer. nat. h.c. mult. Karlheinz Brandenburg is one of the inventors of the MP3mp3 file format, probably the most important development for the music industry since the invention of vinyl records. Just a few months ago, he resigned as director of Fraunhofer IDMT to enjoy a “not-so-retired” retirement, as he puts it himself. Not content with just being a senior professor at Ilmenau University of Technology, the founder and CEO of Brandenburg Labs has also been enthusiastically working on “the next big thing”: PARty, quasi the acoustic equivalent of virtual reality. In addition to creating a perfect auditory illusion for the listener, the device serves as an acoustic magnifying glass or filter — essentially, it will allow the user to block out or listen closely to specific sounds. The possible applications are plentiful, but the project is still a long way off from being market ready. While the researchers are facing many challenges, as an investor and researcher, Brandenburg has not been scared off. As with the development of the MP3, this new project is the work of a relatively small, tightly knit team.
To theinterviewA new start-up and mentoring program for Fraunhofer alumniWould you like to support a young team with your expertise and industry knowledge? Your company is interested in new developments and young talents? Or are you planning to set up a young company yourself? For former Fraunhofer employees and industry experts, the commitment to Fraunhofer technologies will become even easier. Together with Fraunhofer Venture, the central spin-off department of the Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft, the Fraunhofer-Alumni e.V. offers its members numerous opportunities to get involved in start-ups at any time.
The program consists of an initial bootcamp followed by a two-stage support phase for the participants. These camps will take place three times a year.
Continuereading!Review: Fraunhofer Alumni Summit in AachenFascinating presentations and top-level talks with bright minds from the academic, political and industrial sectors were on the agenda of the 3rd Fraunhofer Alumni Summit held on 28 September in Aachen. Happy to be reunited, the delegates also entered into animated discussions and creatively communicated research projects concerning additive manufacturing during the Science Slam.
The 3rd Fraunhofer Alumni Summit began with the welcome speech in front of Aachen's landmark building. Touring the cathedral, the place of Charlemagne's coronation, the delegates attuned themselves to the varied two-day event programme and the exchange of interesting ideas. The alumni gained insights into current activities at Fraunhofer during their subsequent visit to the three Aachen-based Fraunhofer institutes – the ILT, the IPT and the IME. Researchers presented the latest interesting research projects concerning laser technology, additive manufacturing and industrial plant cultivation. Excited to see one another again, the delegates saw out the first day together at Aachen's Tivoli stadium, where lively discussions ensued.
Continuereading.
To the member sectionLOGINREGISTERJoin the Fraunhofer-Alumni e.V.
At the Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft we are taking the future into our own hands and asking again and again: What's next? As a Fraunhofer alumni, you have access to a worldwide and interdisciplinary network of top-class experts in business, science and politics. Benefit from the numerous advantages of this exclusive membership.
Alumni-FAQsAlumni brochureThis bilingual brochure informs you about the most important offers, events and dates at a glance!Fraunhofer-Alumni e.V.
The Fraunhofer-Alumni-e.V. is a strong community of experts. Here, you can find out who can become a member of the Fraunhofer-Alumni-e.V.
International Alumni EventsMore than 40 participants came to the first Fraunhofer alumni event outside Germany in Beijing. More Events for interantional Fraunhofer-Alumni will be offered in the future.
Become a memberAs a member of the Fraunhofer Alumni e.V., you are an active part of the alumni network – regardless of where you are currently working or researching. The core is the Fraunhofer Alumni Portal.
What alumni really wantIn a survey, Fraunhofer alumni were asked what expectations they have of the Fraunhofer-Alumni e.V. These results serve as a basis to make the membership of the association even more attractive for present and future members.
ExclusivePersonalFraunhofer-Alumni e.V.
The Fraunhofer-Alumni-e.V. is a strong community of experts. Here, you can find out who can become a member of the Fraunhofer-Alumni-e.V.
CapableBecome am memberAs a member of the Fraunhofer Alumni e.V., you are an active part of the alumni network – regardless of where you are currently working or researching.
InternationalInspire your careerFraunhofer-Alumni e.V. launched the new "Career Portal", the main focus is on supporting departing Fraunhofer employees and Alumni in their further career. Application profiles are only accessible by supporting enterprises like Bosch. Further information can be found in the Fraunhofer intranet or refer toMartin Schindler.
Fraunhofer-Alumni-EventsFraunhofer Alumni Meet-up in BeijingMore than 40 participants came to the first Fraunhofer alumni event outside Germany. At the German Center in Beijing, they attended exciting lectures by Fraunhofer experts and networking in the brewery.
Navigation and Social MediaShareQuick LinksSource: Fraunhofer-GesellschaftFraunhofer-Gesellschaft - AlumniOnline in Internet; URL: https://www.fraunhofer.de/en/quick-links/alumni.htmlDate: 21.5.2022 22:58
