old id = 2711
A prototype closed-loop brain–machine interface for the study and treatment of pain | Nature Biomedical Engineering
2021
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41551-021-00736-7

Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript.
AdvertisementA prototype closed-loop brain–machine interface for the study and treatment of painNature Biomedical Engineering(2021)Cite this article3486Accesses5Citations336AltmetricMetricsdetailsSubjectsAbstractChronic pain is characterized by discrete pain episodes of unpredictable frequency and duration. This hinders the study of pain mechanisms and contributes to the use of pharmacological treatments associated with side effects, addiction and drug tolerance. Here, we show that a closed-loop brain–machine interface (BMI) can modulate sensory-affective experiences in real time in freely behaving rats by coupling neural codes for nociception directly with therapeutic cortical stimulation. The BMI decodes the onset of nociception via a state-space model on the basis of the analysis of online-sorted spikes recorded from the anterior cingulate cortex (which is critical for pain processing) and couples real-time pain detection with optogenetic activation of the prelimbic prefrontal cortex (which exerts top–down nociceptive regulation). In rats, the BMI effectively inhibited sensory and affective behaviours caused by acute mechanical or thermal pain, and by chronic inflammatory or neuropathic pain. The approach provides a blueprint for demand-based neuromodulation to treat sensory-affective disorders, and could be further leveraged for nociceptive control and to study pain mechanisms.
You have full access to this article via your institution.
MainChronic pain affects one in four adults, and it is composed of discrete episodes of acute pain that are triggered by external stimuli or occur spontaneously1. Currently, there is no method to isolate individual symptomatic episodes, making it difficult for the study of pain mechanisms, especially the mechanisms of spontaneously occurring pain, and for treatment. Pain treatment therefore depends on continuous pharmacological delivery or neurostimulation. Around-the-clock pharmacological treatment for chronic pain is linked with sedation, desensitization and even addiction2,3. Meanwhile, continuous spinal cord stimulation is associated with side effects such as numbness and paraesthesia4, whereas brain targets serve a multitude of functions, making continuous stimulation impractical to implement, with questionable long-term benefits5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31. Therefore, a key challenge in the study and management of chronic pain is to aim treatment at specific symptomatic episodes to minimize the side effects of overuse and to improve compliance.
A closed-loop BMI couples automated detection of neural signals for behaviour with therapeutic neuromodulation and has shown promise for seizure control and motor rehabilitation32,33,34,35,36,37,38,39,40,41,42,43,44,45,46. Recent advances in optogenetics and in vivo electrophysiology enable closed-loop control of discrete neural circuits for mechanistic and treatment studies in experimental models47,48. However, the application of closed-loop BMI remains highly speculative in sensory-affective disorders due to the challenges in real-time sensory decoding and direct behavioural control in awake experimental subjects. We hypothesize that, by coupling pain episodes detected by automated analysis of neural activity with therapeutic brain stimulation, a closed-loop BMI can deliver demand-based analgesia to minimize overuse and improve safety. Just as importantly, this interface can be used for studies of pain mechanisms, especially mechanisms of spontaneous pain or tonic pain, which currently cannot be reliably assessed.
The design of a closed-loop BMI requires an input arm for signal detection and an output arm for treatment (Fig.
1). The challenge with the design of a BMI for pain control is that, unlike visual or auditory systems, there is no primary pain cortex. Instead, multiple cortical regions are involved in processing and regulating pain. A wealth of human neuroimaging and lesioning data, as well as animal data, have indicated that the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) is critical for pain processing49,50,51,52,53,54,55,56,57,58,59,60,61,62,63,64,65. Supervised or unsupervised learning methods have shown that neural signals from the ACC, including spike activities, can distinguish the intensity and timing of noxious inputs with good sensitivity and specificity57,58,59,66. Thus, neural activity recorded from the ACC could be used for pain detection in the design of a prototype BMI approach. For the treatment output arm, we sought brain targets that could provide endogenous pain relief. Activation of these regions with a BMI in a temporally regulated manner presumably could provide additional pain relief while minimizing side effects. Recent work from multiple groups has shown that pyramidal neurons in the prelimbic region of the prefrontal cortex (PFC) project to regions such as the nucleus accumbens, amygdala and periaqueductal grey to exert endogenous relief of sensory and affective behaviours associated with acute and chronic pain in rodent models67,68,69,70,71,72,73,74,75,76. Meanwhile, prior unbiased machine learning analyses have also revealed that neural firing rates in the prelimbic PFC could distinguish noxious from non-noxious peripheral stimuli with up to 75% accuracy, further supporting the specificity of the nociceptive response in this region72. The rodent prelimbic PFC shares functional and structural homology with the dorsolateral PFC in primates76,77. Previous studies have shown that functional deficits in the dorsolateral PFC play an important role for the pathogenesis of chronic pain, and this region will probably serve as a key neuromodulation target in patients78. Therefore, to facilitate translation, we have selected the PFC as the treatment arm in the development of the pain-modulating BMI.
a, Schematic of a BMI that consists of three steps: (1) neural recording and online signal processing, including spike sorting; (2) neural decoding for pain onset detection based on sorted units; (3) pain onset detection to trigger therapeutic neurostimulation as neurofeedback. The magenta and green circular symbols with black arrows indicate the SSM (details below). The curved magenta arrows denote data flow for the model inputs, while the curved blue arrows denote the model outputs for therapeutic neurostimulation. The blue box denotes the laser.
b, Placement of optic fibre in the prelimbic PFC and recording electrodes in the ACC.
c, Left: schematic of the SSM for detecting the change point (pain onset) from the neuronal ensemble spike activity. Right: an example of pain onset detection using the SSM-based decoding strategy. The top example raster plot shows online sorted population spike counts (bin size = 50 ms), with the darker colour representing greater spike counts. The units of the colour bar are spikes per bin. The bottom magenta trace represents the estimatedZ-score from the univariate latent state, and the shaded area marks the 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Horizontal dashed lines mark the significance thresholds. The vertical yellow line denotes the onset of noxious stimulation. In the training phase, the SSM parameters were inferred from the ACC ensemble spike data, as represented by the top raster plot. In the testing phase, a one-dimensional discrete-time latent dynamic state sequence {zk} (k= 1, …,T) was inferred from the SSM, and the bottomZ-score (magenta trace) was calculated from the inferred latent state variable (Methods).
ResultsDesign of a closed-loop BMI to study and treat painTo develop a closed-loop BMI for pain, we paired a detection arm with a treatment arm (Fig.
1a). In the current design, we use neural activity recorded from the ACC for pain detection, given its critical role in pain processing (Fig.
1band Supplementary Fig.
1a)49,50,51,52,53,54,55,56,57,58,59,60,61,62,63,64,65. Decoding the onset and duration of a sensory or aversive event in real time in an awake, freely behaving animal or human subjects requires a statistical model to detect changes in neural responses in the presence of background noise. We have developed a state-space model (SSM) to analyse the onset of changes in ensemble spike activity in the ACC in response to noxious stimuli (Methods, Fig.
1cand Supplementary Fig.
1d). With this SSM-based strategy, we identify a proxy for the acute pain signal that drives the observed population spike activity, thus formulating pain onset detection as the detection of a change from the putative baseline condition. This model-based strategy has revealed that the latent processes driving ACC neuronal activities correlate to the onset of observed pain behaviour with high degrees of accuracy and temporal precision57,58. In this Article, we have adapted this SSM-based strategy for real-time detection of the onset and duration of nociceptive responses in the ACC from awake, freely behaving rats (Fig.
1). For the treatment arm in our current BMI design, we use optogenetic activation of the prelimbic PFC (a region that has been shown to provide top–down pain regulation67,68,69,70,71,72,73,74,75,76) (Supplementary Fig.
1b,c). To assist online model parameter selection and data visualization, we have designed a custom graphic user interface (GUI) to integrate the pain detection arm with the treatment arm, forming a closed-loop neural interface (Supplementary Fig.
1c,e).
Closed-loop BMI controls acute evoked painWe first applied this real-time BMI in the context of acute thermal pain. We used a calibrated infrared (IR) generator from the Hargreaves pain assessment toolkit to deliver a noxious stimulus at high IR intensity and a non-noxious stimulus at low IR intensity to the hind paws of rats (Fig.
2a,b). Previously, ACC neurons contralateral to the site of peripheral stimulation were found to increase their firing rates in response to a noxious thermal stimulus (Supplementary Fig.
2a,c–e)59. By contrast, the non-noxious stimulus did not produce significantly increased spiking activities in the same neurons (Supplementary Fig.
2b–e). We applied our SSM decoding method to detect the onset of nociceptive ACC neuronal responses in real time (Fig.
1cand Supplementary Fig.
1c). Our model-based strategy detected the onset of pain-induced responses reliably after the presentation of noxious stimulus, with high temporal precision (Fig.
2c). The SSM-based decoder detected up to 80% of evoked thermal pain episodes, with relatively low false detection rates (Fig.
2d,eand Supplementary Table1). In a majority of the cases, detection occurred after the presentation of noxious stimulus but prior to paw withdrawals, suggesting that cortical nociceptive response precedes behavioural response (Fig.
2c,f,g). These results validate the accuracy of our pain-onset decoder and the possibility for a closed-loop system to intervene in pain-related behaviours immediately after the detection of cortical nociceptive responses. Thus, we coupled this detection of nociceptive activity triggered by the SSM with optogenetic stimulation of the prelimbic PFC contralateral to the ACC recording sites (Fig.
1and Supplementary Fig.
1a,b). We expressed channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2; or yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) control) using a calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) promoter to activate pyramidal neurons in the prelimbic PFC (Supplementary Fig.
1b). We applied our closed-loop BMI to the Hargreaves test of acute thermal pain (Fig.
2f). Our results show that the BMI treatment prolonged withdrawal latency on the Hargreaves test, indicating relief of pain-related behaviour (Fig.
2h). We then compared the pain-inhibitory effect provided by the BMI with that provided by manually controlled, continuous PFC activation. We found that BMI-triggered PFC activation was as efficacious as continuous PFC activation in reducing thermal sensitivity on the Hargreaves test, further validating the capability of this closed-loop neuromodulation system to inhibit pain (Fig.
2h). At the cellular level, activation by BMI reduced the peak and cumulative firing rates of ACC pain-responsive neurons after noxious stimulation (Fig.
2i–k). This temporally specific reduction in ACC neuronal activity confirms the causal effect between ACC firing activity and pain behaviours that has been suggested in previous studies53,59. Therefore, a closed-loop BMI can not only deliver therapeutic interventions in real time, but also enable studies of causal inference for the neural basis of pain.
a, Schematic of BMI experiments during thermal pain delivery with an IR emitter. Stimulus presentation lasted until paw withdrawal or 5 s. Opto, optogenetic stimulation.
b, Peripheral nocifensive behavioural response to thermal stimulation. A noxious stimulus (IR 70) triggered paw withdrawals, whereas a non-noxious stimulus (IR 10) did not. Withdrawal rate, defined as the percentage of peripheral stimulations that resulted in observed paw withdrawal, is shown.
n= 7 rats for non-noxious stimulation (IR 10) andn= 17 rats for noxious stimulation (IR 70). ****P< 0.0001, two-sided unpaired Student’st-test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
c,d, Example SSM detection performances. The SSM-based decoder detected the onset of a pain episode in a single trial in response to noxious stimulation (c), in contrast to a trial with non-noxious stimulation (d). The top raster plots show online sorted population spike counts (bin size = 50 ms), with the darker colour representing greater spike counts. The units of the colour bar are spikes per bin. The bottom magenta trace represents the estimatedZ-score from the univariate latent state, and the shaded area marks the 95% CI. Horizontal dashed lines mark the significance thresholds (Methods). The vertical magenta and green lines indicate the time of peripheral stimulation: magenta, noxious stimulus; green, non-noxious stimulus. The vertical blue line indicates the time of paw withdrawal. The black arrow indicates the decoded pain onset.
n= 28 biologically independent neurons were recorded in the example session incandn= 26 biologically independent neurons in the example session ind.
e, Performance of the SSM-based decoder in detecting thermal pain. Pain detection rates were calculated as a percentage of trials that had positive pain onset detection.
n= 7 rats were used with non-noxious stimulation (IR 10) andn= 18 rats with noxious stimulation (IR 70). ****P< 0.0001, two-sided unpaired Student’st-test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
f, Schematic of SSM-decoder training and behaviour testing with BMI.
g, Pain onset detection occurred prior to the withdrawal responses to noxious thermal stimulation.
n= 9 sessions from six biologically independent rats; **P= 0.0057, two-sided paired Student’st-test.
h, Application of the closed-loop BMI prolonged the withdrawal latency on the Hargreaves test.
n= 8 rats. No opto versus BMI opto, **P= 0.0074; no opto versus manual opto, **P= 0.0027; BMI opto versus manual opto,P= 0.4486 (NS, not significant), one-way analysis of variance, two-sided Tukey’s multiple comparisons test with repeated measures. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
i, Left: a representative ACC neuron increased firing rates in response to a noxious thermal stimulus (IR 70). Right: BMI reduced firing rate changes in response to the noxious stimulus. Time 0 indicates the onset of the stimulus. FR, firing rate.
j, BMI treatment reduced the peak firing rates of pain-responsive ACC neurons in response to the noxious stimulus (Methods).
n= 33 neurons from six rats; ***P= 0.0001, two-sided paired Student’st-test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
k, BMI treatment reduced the cumulative firing rate response of ACC neurons over a 5-s period (within the [0, 5] s range, where time 0 indicates the onset of the stimulus) in response to the noxious stimulus.
n= 33 neurons from six rats, *P= 0.0135, two-sided paired Student’st-test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
Next, we used pin prick (PP) to deliver mechanical pain to the hind paws of rats (Fig.
3a,b). In contrast to IR, PP caused an almost instantaneous withdrawal response. Nevertheless, ACC neurons increased their firing rates in response to noxious stimulations (Supplementary Fig.
3a,c–e), in contrast to non-noxious stimulations (von Frey filaments (vF)) (Supplementary Fig.
3b–e), and our SSM-based decoder was able to detect these evoked mechanical pain episodes (Fig.
3c–eand Supplementary Table1).
a, Schematic of BMI experiments during mechanical stimulus delivery.
b, Peripheral nocifensive behavioural response to mechanical stimulation. A noxious stimulus (PP) triggered paw withdrawals, whereas a non-noxious stimulus (6 g vF) did not. The withdrawal rate, defined as the percentage of peripheral stimulations that resulted in observed paw withdrawal, is shown.
n= 9 rats; ****P< 0.0001, two-sided paired Student’st-test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
c,d, The SSM-based decoder detected the onset of a pain episode in a single trial in response to noxious stimulation (PP;c), in contrast to a trial with non-noxious stimulation (6 g vF;d). The top raster plots show online sorted population spike counts (bin size = 50 ms), with the darker colour representing greater spike counts. The units of the colour bar are spikes per bin. The bottom magenta trace represents the estimatedZ-score from the univariate latent state, and the shaded area marks the 95% CI. Horizontal dashed lines indicate the significance thresholds (Methods). The vertical magenta and green lines indicate the time of peripheral stimulation: magenta, noxious stimulus; green, non-noxious stimulus. The vertical blue line indicates the time of paw withdrawal. The black arrow indicates the decoded pain onset.
n= 26 biologically independent neurons were recorded incandn= 37 neurons ind.
e, The performance of the SSM-based decoder in detecting mechanical pain. Detection rates were calculated as the percentage of trials that had positive pain onset detection.
n= 9 rats; ***P= 0.0002, two-sided paired Student’st-test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
f, Schematic of the CPA assay to assess pain aversion. In a two-chamber set-up, aversive response was triggered by a noxious mechanical stimulus (PP) applied to the hind paws. One of the chambers was paired with BMI, and the opposite chamber was paired with random PFC activation of matching duration and intensity. The orange solid line on the rat’s head denotes BMI decoding, while the blue line denotes optogenetic stimulation. In the control chamber, the dashed blue line indicates random optogenetic stimulation.
g, After conditioning, ChR2 rats preferred the BMI treatment chamber.
n= 9 rats; **P= 0.0039; preconditioning versus testing for BMI and for control, two-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
h, YFP control rats demonstrated no preference for the BMI treatment.
n= 6 rats;P= 0.8438 (NS); preconditioning versus testing, two-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
i, CPA scores for BMI treatment in rats that experienced acute mechanical pain.
n= 9 rats with ChR2 injection andn= 6 control rats with YFP injection; **P= 0.0016, two-sided Mann–Whitney U-test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
Pain is characterized by both sensory and affective components. To test the affective component of pain, we used a classic conditioned place aversion (CPA) assay to assess the ability of the BMI to control the aversive response to mechanical pain59,72,79,80. During the conditioning phase, we applied noxious stimulations (PP) to the rats’ hind paws in both treatment chambers (Fig.
3f). In one of these chambers, rats received automated, BMI-triggered therapeutic PFC activation. In the opposite chamber, rats received randomly delivered PFC stimulations of matching duration and intensity. After conditioning, rats preferred the chamber associated with the BMI treatment (Fig.
3g). Similarly, rats preferred BMI-triggered PFC activation to no PFC activation (Supplementary Fig.
4a,b). By contrast, control rats that did not express ChR2 did not develop chamber preference (Fig.
3h,i). Further, conditioning with randomly delivered optogenetic PFC stimulation did not result in chamber preference (Supplementary Fig.
4c,d), suggesting that context-specific activation of the prelimbic PFC is important for providing pain relief. To rule out potential cognitive and affective side effects of PFC stimulation associated with BMI, we tested the preference for the BMI in control rats where a non-noxious stimulus (stimulus by 6 g vF) was presented in both chambers (Supplementary Fig.
5a,b). In the absence of noxious stimuli, rats did not develop a preference for the BMI treatment, indicating that PFC stimulation delivered by the BMI was not intrinsically rewarding or aversive. Furthermore, BMI did not alter locomotion (Supplementary Fig.
5c). Therefore, a closed-loop system coupling detected nociceptive responses in the ACC with therapeutic PFC activation specifically inhibits both sensory and affective behavioural response to acute noxious stimuli.
Closed-loop BMI controls chronic painNext, we investigated whether this closed-loop BMI could be used to inhibit chronic pain. Two hallmark features of chronic pain are hypersensitivity to peripheral stimuli and tonic or spontaneous pain. We first assessed hypersensitivity in a well-established inflammatory pain model (the complete Freund’s adjuvant (CFA) model, Fig.
4a). As expected59, CFA-treated rats developed sensory allodynia to mechanical vF stimulations, as manifested by paw withdrawal responses (Fig.
4band Supplementary Fig.
6a). Our neural decoding analysis distinguished a 6 g vF stimulus that sufficiently elicited nocifensive withdrawals from a 0.4 g vF stimulus that did not elicit withdrawals (Fig.
4c–eand Supplementary Table1). These results indicate that, in addition to detecting events triggered by noxious stimuli, our SSM-based strategy can also detect allodynia events in real time. BMI-triggered activation of the prelimbic PFC, meanwhile, reduced mechanical allodynia (Fig.
4f). In addition to peripheral hypersensitivity at the site of injury, chronic pain also causes an increased aversive response, which can be assessed by the CPA59,68,72,79,80. In one chamber, we paired a peripheral 6 g vF stimulus (which is sufficient to induce allodynia) with BMI-driven activation of the PFC, and in the opposite chamber paired this stimulus with randomly delivered PFC activation (Fig.
4g). After conditioning, rats preferred the BMI-paired chamber (Fig.
4h–j). By contrast, rats did not prefer the BMI-paired chamber when they received a non-noxious, 0.4 g vF stimulus during conditioning (Supplementary Fig.
6b,c). We then repeated these experiments in a model of chronic neuropathic pain (spared nerve injury (SNI))67,81(Fig.
5a,band Supplementary Fig.
7a). Again, our SSM-based strategy could detect when rats received a 6 g vF stimulus that elicited nocifensive withdrawals versus when rats received a 0.4 g vF stimulus that did not consistently elicit withdrawals (Fig.
5c–eand Supplementary Table1). The BMI, driven by pain detection, in turn reduced mechanical allodynia in the SNI model (Fig.
5f). In the CPA assay, we paired the 6 g vF stimulus with either BMI-triggered or random PFC activation (Fig.
5g), and SNI-treated rats preferred the BMI-paired chamber (Fig.
5h–j). By contrast, rats showed no preference for the BMI-paired chamber if the peripheral stimulus was non-noxious (Supplementary Fig.
7b,c). Together, these results demonstrate that peripheral allodynia in the chronic pain state produces similar neural responses in the ACC as acute noxious stimulations in naïve animals, and these neural responses can in turn be used to trigger closed-loop neurostimulation to inhibit sensory hypersensitivity and decrease aversion.
a, Schematic for the CFA model of inflammatory pain.
b, Peripheral allodynia response after CFA treatment. The 6 g vF triggered paw withdrawals, whereas the 0.4 g vF did not. Withdrawal rate, defined as the percentage of peripheral stimulations that resulted in observed paw withdrawal, is shown.
n= 7 rats; ***P= 0.0008, two-sided paired Student’st-test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m of biological replicates.
c,d, The SSM-based decoder detected the onset of a pain episode in a single trial in response to peripheral allodynia-inducing stimulus (6 g vF;c) in a CFA-treated rat, in contrast to a trial with a non-allodynia-inducing stimulus (0.4 g vF;d). The top raster plots show online sorted population spike counts (bin size = 50 ms), with the darker colour representing greater spike counts. The units of the colour bar are spikes per bin. The bottom magenta trace represents the estimatedZ-score from the univariate latent state, and the shaded area marks the 95% CI. Horizontal dashed lines mark the significance thresholds (Methods). The vertical magenta and green lines indicate the time of peripheral stimulation: magenta, 6 g vF stimulus; green, 0.4 g vF stimulus. The vertical blue line indicates the time of paw withdrawal. The black arrow indicates the decoded pain onset.
n= 24 biologically independent neurons were recorded incandn= 24 neurons ind.
e, The performance of the SSM-based decoder in detecting the onset of mechanical allodynia in CFA-treated rats. Detection rates were calculated as a percentage of trials that had positive pain onset detection.
n= 7 rats; ***P= 0.0008, two-sided paired Student’st-test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
f, Closed-loop BMI inhibited mechanical allodynia in CFA-treated rats.
n= 6 rats with ChR2 injection andn= 4 control rats with YFP injection; ***P= 0.0002, two-sided unpaired Student’st-test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
g, Schematic of the CPA assay in CFA-treated rats. Aversive response was triggered by an allodynia-inducing mechanical stimulus (6 g vF) applied in both chambers. One of the chambers was paired with BMI, and the opposite chamber was paired with random PFC activation of matching duration and intensity. The orange solid line on the rat’s head denotes BMI decoding, and the blue line denotes optogenetic stimulation. In the control chamber, the dashed blue line indicates random optogenetic stimulation.
h, In ChR2 rats, BMI treatment reduced aversion associated with mechanical allodynia (triggered by the 6 g vF stimulus) in the CFA model.
n= 8 rats; **P= 0.0078; preconditioning versus testing for BMI and for control, two-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
i, YFP control rats demonstrated no preference for the BMI treatment.
n= 4 rats;P= 0.8750 (NS); preconditioning versus testing, two-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
j, CPA scores for BMI treatment in CFA-treated rats.
n= 8 rats with ChR2 injection andn= 4 control rats with YFP injection; **P= 0.0040, two-sided Mann–Whitney U test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
a, Schematic for the SNI model of chronic neuropathic pain.
b, Peripheral allodynia response after SNI. The 6 g vF triggered paw withdrawals, whereas the 0.4 g vF did not. Withdrawal rate, defined as the percentage of peripheral stimulations that resulted in observed paw withdrawal, is shown.
n= 6 rats; ****P< 0.0001, two-sided paired Student’st-test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
c,d, The SSM-based decoder detected the onset of a pain episode in a single trial in response to peripheral allodynia-inducing stimulus (6 g vF;c) in an SNI-treated rat, in contrast to a trial with a non-allodynia-inducing stimulus (0.4 g vF,d). The top raster plots show online sorted population spike counts (bin size = 50 ms), with the darker colour representing greater spike counts. The units of the colour bar are spikes per bin. The bottom magenta trace represents the estimatedZ-score from the univariate latent state, and the shaded area marks the 95% CI. Horizontal dashed lines mark the significance thresholds (Methods). The vertical magenta and green lines indicate the time of peripheral stimulation: magenta, 6 g vF stimulus; green, 0.4 g vF stimulus. The vertical blue line indicates the time of paw withdrawal. The black arrow indicates the decoded pain onset.
n= 30 biologically independent neurons were recorded incandn= 30 neurons ind.
e, The performance of the SSM-based decoder in detecting mechanical allodynia in SNI-treated rats. Detection rates were calculated as a percentage of trials that had positive pain onset detection.
n= 6 rats; ***P= 0.0008, two-sided paired Student’st-test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
f, Closed-loop BMI inhibited mechanical allodynia in the SNI model.
n= 5 rats with ChR2 injection andn= 4 control rats with YFP injection; ***P= 0.0004, two-sided unpaired Student’st-test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
g, Schematic of the CPA assay in SNI-treated rats. An aversive response was triggered by an allodynia-inducing mechanical stimulus (6 g vF) applied in both chambers. One of the chambers was paired with BMI, and the opposite chamber was paired with random PFC activation of matching duration and intensity. The orange solid line on the rat’s head denotes BMI decoding, and the blue line denotes optogenetic stimulation. In the control chamber, the dashed blue line indicates random optogenetic stimulation.
h, In ChR2 rats, BMI treatment reduced aversion associated with mechanical allodynia in the SNI model.
n= 6 rats; *P= 0.0313; preconditioning versus testing for BMI and for control, two-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
i, YFP control rats demonstrated no preference for the BMI treatment.
n= 4 rats;P= 0.6250 (NS); preconditioning versus testing, two-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
j, CPA scores for BMI treatment in SNI-treated rats.
n= 6 rats with ChR2 injection andn= 4 control rats with YFP injection; *P= 0.0381, two-sided Mann–Whitney U-test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
In addition to hypersensitivity to evoked stimuli, a key symptom for chronic pain is tonic pain80. Recent studies have shown that the CPA assay can be used to specifically test the presence of tonic pain in animal models67,80,82,83. However, the identification of discrete spontaneously occurring pain-aversive episodes that underlie tonic pain remains an unmet challenge in both animal and human research. This challenge hinders the understanding of neural mechanisms for tonic pain and the development of appropriate therapeutics. The high temporal precision of the closed-loop BMI provides a solution to this problem. A number of studies have demonstrated the critical role of ACC neurons in mediating the tonic-aversive quality of chronic pain52,53,59,84. Thus, we hypothesized that our decoding algorithm could be triggered by spontaneously occurring nociceptive signals in the ACC. To detect such signals, we inferred SSM parameters based on population ACC activities during training trials from evoked pain episodes, and then applied these parameters to isolate putative spontaneous pain episodes based on dynamic changes in ACC activities in freely moving rats from chronic pain models (Methods). The accuracy of these detected episodes could then be tested by the application of BMI on pain behaviours in the CPA assay. In CFA-treated rats, we paired one CPA chamber with BMI, and the other chamber with random activation of the PFC of matching duration and intensity, in the absence of additional peripheral stimulations (Fig.
6a). Detected nociceptive activity in the ACC should trigger PFC activation to inhibit pain-related behaviours during a prolonged conditioning phase85. As we expected, after training with an evoked stimulus, our decoder identified putative spontaneous pain episodes in the CFA model (Fig.
6band Supplementary Fig.
8). After conditioning, rats developed preference for the chamber associated with BMI-triggered PFC activation, suggesting that our BMI could identify and treat spontaneous pain (Fig.
6c–e). These results support the role of the ACC neurons to process the aversive signal in tonic pain conditions, as shown in previous studies52,53,59,84. To rule out the potential rewarding effects of BMI, we tested the preference for the BMI in naïve rats, and found that these control rats did not develop a preference for the BMI treatment (Supplementary Fig.
9).
a, Schematic of the CPA assay to test tonic or spontaneous pain in the CFA model. No peripheral stimuli were given. One of the chambers was paired with BMI, and the opposite chamber was paired with random PFC activation of matching duration and intensity. The orange solid line on the rat’s head denotes BMI decoding, while the blue line denotes optogenetic stimulation. In the control chamber, the dashed blue line indicates random optogenetic stimulation.
b, An example session of sequential pain onset detection based on the SSM-based decoder in a CFA-treated rat. The top raster plot shows online sorted population spike counts (bin size = 50 ms), with the darker colour representing greater spike counts. The units of the colour bar are spikes per bin. The bottom magenta trace represents the estimatedZ-score from the univariate latent state, and the shaded area marks the 95% CI. Horizontal dashed lines mark the significance thresholds (Methods). The black arrows indicate detected onset of tonic pain episodes.
n= 13 biologically independent neurons were recorded.
c, In ChR2 rats, CFA-treated rats prefer the BMI chamber.
n= 6 rats; *P= 0.0313; preconditioning versus testing for BMI and for control, two-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
d, YFP control rats demonstrated no preference for the BMI treatment.
n= 6 rats;P= 0.8125 (NS); preconditioning versus testing, two-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
e, CPA scores for BMI treatment in reducing tonic pain in CFA rats.
n= 6 rats with ChR2 injection andn= 6 control rats with YFP injection; **P= 0.0087, two-sided Mann–Whitney U-test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
Next, we tested the ability of the BMI for targeting tonic neuropathic pain in the SNI model (Fig.
7a). Our SSM-based strategy provided similar spontaneous nociceptive detection in the SNI model (Fig.
7b), and rats showed preference for the BMI treatment, suggesting that our closed-loop BMI could inhibit tonic pain (Fig.
7c–e). As PFC activation triggered by detected ACC nociceptive response induces pain relief compared with random activation, the detected activity has a high likelihood of underlying true spontaneous pain events. Therefore, our BMI can serve as a valuable tool for identifying spontaneously occurring pain for mechanistic enquiries. To validate the capability of our BMI to detect and modulate tonic pain, we examined its efficacy at inhibiting paw-licking behaviour. Paw licking has been identified as a spontaneous pain-related behaviour in inflammatory pain models86,87,88,89. Here, we found that the closed-loop BMI was effective in reducing the paw-licking frequency and duration in the CFA model (Supplementary Fig.
10). These results further support the efficacy of the closed-loop BMI to detect and treat tonic pain in rodent models.
a, Schematic of the CPA assay to test tonic pain in the SNI model. No peripheral stimuli were given. One of the chambers was paired with BMI and the opposite chamber was paired with random PFC activation. The orange solid line on the rat’s head denotes BMI decoding, and the blue line denotes optogenetic stimulation. In the control chamber, the dashed blue line indicates random optogenetic stimulation.
b, An example session of sequential pain onset detection based on the SSM-based decoder in an SNI-treated rat. The top raster plot shows online sorted population spike counts (bin size = 50 ms), with the darker colour representing greater spike counts. The units of the colour bar are spikes per bin. The bottom magenta trace represents the estimatedZ-score from the univariate latent state, and the shaded area marks the 95% CI. Horizontal dashed lines mark the significance thresholds (Methods). The black arrows indicate detected onset of tonic pain episodes.
n= 6 biologically independent neurons were recorded.
c, In ChR2 rats, SNI-treated rats preferred the BMI chamber after conditioning.
n= 6 rats; *P= 0.0313; preconditioning versus testing for BMI and for control, two-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
d, YFP control rats demonstrated no preference for the BMI treatment.
n= 4 rats;P= 0.8750 (NS); preconditioning versus testing, two-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
e, CPA scores for BMI treatment in reducing tonic pain in SNI rats.
n= 6 rats with ChR2 injection andn= 4 rats with YFP injection; *P= 0.0381, two-sided Mann–Whitney U-test. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. of biological replicates.
DiscussionTreatment options for chronic pain remain limited, and continuous pharmacological and neuromodulation therapies are associated with multiple side effects. Here, we have engineered a BMI as a prototype closed-loop neuromodulation system to inhibit pain. This system can be used to test therapeutics and to provide causal inference for mechanisms of nociception. It can be further developed to deliver demand-based pain treatment in patients. A major advantage of this system is its ability to provide high temporal resolution to precisely target discrete symptomatic episodes. By tailoring transient brain stimulation with specific pain episodes, this BMI can minimize overtreatment to improve compliance and reduce side effects for patients who need long-term therapies.
In our study, we have chosen the ACC as the detection arm and the PFC as the treatment arm. The choice of ACC for pain detection is based on its well-established function in pain processing49,50,51,52,53,54,55,56,57,58,59,60,61,62,63,64,65,90, as well as previous success in determining the intensity and timing of pain based on pre-recorded neural activities in this region57,58,59,66. Our results here validate the important role of the ACC to signal the onset and duration of pain, compatible with previous reports52,53,59,84. Future studies can further refine the detection sensitivity for spontaneously occurring pain by scaling up or down the coefficients of our model-based decoding algorithm or by combining recordings from additional neural regions. Future investigations can also examine in greater detail how pain decoding in the ACC correlates with pain identification using behavioural analyses91,92. In our study, we have targeted the prelimbic PFC as the treatment arm, as previous studies have shown that this region provides critical top–down projections for endogenous pain inhibition67,68,69,70,71. Our behavioural results validate the role of this region in the regulation of both sensory withdrawal and pain-related aversion. Our results further show that transient activation of the PFC is sufficient to reduce pain symptoms, as long as neuromodulation is temporally coupled with the nociceptive inputs. Given well-established structural and functional homology between the rodent prelimbic PFC and the dorsolateral PFC in humans76,77, our prototype BMI provides the intriguing potential for effective demand-based treatment in patients.
Like many cortical areas, the ACC and PFC have multiple functions in addition to pain processing and regulation. Currently, because we do not have specific anatomic targets for pain treatment, most brain regions that can be used as components of a practical closed-loop BMI will inevitably have non-specific effects. Similarly, non-specific effects are associated with current neuromodulation treatments such as deep brain stimulation treatments for Parkinson’s disease or mood disorders93,94. However, a BMI approach can reduce these side effects by restricting these non-specific effects to the duration of treatment, which in turn is limited to only when the brain senses pain. Thus, in our study, we propose a method to improve pain treatment specificity in terms of time and context, and this approach can complement future efforts to achieve further specificity through improved spatial, anatomic and cellular resolution.
Although we have used the ACC and PFC in the development of our pain BMI, our system has the flexibility to operate with other cortical or subcortical targets. For example, activities in the primary somatosensory cortex, the insular cortex, the thalamus and amygdala can all form detection arms in this BMI, and a comparison of BMI-mediated behavioural control will quantify the specific contribution of individual regions to pain processing. Although false and missed detections can be caused by non-specificity and/or non-stationarity of neuronal firing in specific brain regions of freely behaving rats, simultaneous recordings across multiple pain-processing regions in the brain, such as the ACC, the primary somatosensory cortex and the insular cortex, have the potential to further improve decoding accuracy, especially for spontaneously occurring pain episodes95. Meanwhile, additional pain-regulating regions such as the primary motor cortex and the periaqueductal grey can also be tested as the therapeutic arm of this BMI. Future work in these and other cortical and subcortical regions will be done to further validate and refine our BMI design. In addition, our neural interface can be applied to causal investigations of real-time neural changes across multiple brain regions for pain processing and regulation as well as investigations of the laterality of cortical pain processing.
To further facilitate clinical translation, future work should also focus on the use of other recording modalities, including local field potentials, electrocorticography or electroencephalogram signals, as well as the deployment of wireless electrical or ultrasound stimulations. These future developments of the BMI technology will be particularly beneficial for patients who suffer from chronic pain, such as patients with chronic neuropathic back pain or fibromyalgia, whose symptoms can be triggered by specific peripheral stimuli such as positional changes but may also occur spontaneously. Pain in these patients is unpredictable and, in some cases, lacking anatomic specificity, making continuous neuromodulation difficult to implement. As our study demonstrates, BMI technology has the potential to capture these symptomatic pain episodes and provide temporally targeted therapy to minimize overtreatment.
In summary, we have designed a closed-loop BMI to study and treat acute and chronic pain in freely behaving experimental models. Our results provide evidence of feasibility for the BMI technology to target sensory and affective processes associated with neuropsychiatric diseases, both as a system for mechanistic enquiry and as a blueprint for therapy.
MethodsExperimental protocol, data acquisition and BMI system architectureAll experimental studies were performed in accordance with the New York University School of Medicine (NYUSOM) Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals to ensure minimal animal use and discomfort. Male Sprague–Dawley rats were purchased from Taconic Farms and kept at the vivarium facility in the NYU Langone Science Building, with controlled humidity, temperature and 12-h (6:30–18:30) light–dark cycle. Food and water were available ad libitum. Animals weighed 250 to 300 g upon arrival to the facility and were given 10 days, on average, to adjust to the new environment before initiation of experiments.
Virus construction and packagingRecombinant adeno-associated viruses (AAV) vectors were serotyped with AAV1 coat proteins and packaged at the UPenn Vector Core. Viral titres were 5 × 1012particles per ml for AAV1.CaMKII.ChR2-eYFP.WPRE.hGH and AAV1.CaMKII(1.3).eYFP.WPRE.hGH.
Viral injectionRats were anaesthetized with isoflurane (1.5–2%). In all experiments, virus was delivered to the prelimbic PFC only. Rats were unilaterally injected with 0.5 µl of viral vectors at a rate of 0.1 µl every 20 s with a 26-G 1-µl Hamilton syringe at anteroposterior (AP) + 2.9 mm, mediolateral (ML) ± 1.6 mm and dorsoventral (DV) − 3.7 mm, with tips angled 17° toward the midline. The microinjection needles were left in place for an additional 10 min, raised 1 mm and left for another minute to allow for diffusion of virus particles away from the injection site and to minimize spread of viral particles along the injection tract. After viral injections, the scalp was sutured and given three weeks for viral expression before optical fibre and electrode implantation.
Prelimbic PFC optical fibre and ACC silicon probe implantation surgeryOptical fibre and electrode implants were performed as described in previous studies59,72. We constructed custom fibre-optic cannulae with 200-μm optic fibres held in 2.5-mm ferrules (Thorlabs) for prelimbic PFC optogenetic stimulation, then 32-channel silicon probes (Buzsaki32-H32_21 mm, NeuroNexus Technologies) were implanted in the ACC for neural recording in the study. Silicon probes were glued with three-dimensional-printed custom design drives or commercial dDrives (NeuroNexus Technologies) before implantation. During the implant, rats were anaesthetized with isoflurane (1.5–2%). Optical fibres were implanted 0.5 mm immediately above the prelimbic PFC viral injection spot (AP + 2.9 mm, ML ± 1.6 mm, DV − 3.2 mm), with tips angled 17° toward the midline. Contralateral to the optical fibre implant, silicon probes were implanted in the ACC (AP + 2.7 mm, ML ± 1.6 mm, DV − 2.0 mm) with tips angled 20° toward the midline. Silicone artificial dura gel (Cambridge NeuroTech) was added to protect the dura. Vaseline was used to wrap electrode movable parts, including the silicon probe shanks and flexible cables, as well as the drive shuttle. Both optical fibre and drive were secured to the skull screws with dental cement. After surgery, rats were given one week to recover before neural recordings.
In vivo electrophysiological recordings and optogenetic stimulationThe hardware of the BMI system for pain experiments consists of the following components: electrode arrays (with drives) and headstages, commutator, data acquisition system, optical fibre cannulae, blue laser, desktop computer, video cameras and other optional devices, as shown in Fig.
1and Supplementary Fig.
1.
Animals with chronic optical fibre and electrode implants were given a 30-min period to habituate to a recording chamber over a mesh or glass table before recording. Silicon probes were connected with 32-channel digital headstages (HST/32D, Plexon) and wired through a motorized commutator (OPT/Carousel M commutator 2LED-4DHST-TH, Plexon). Optical-fibre cannulae were connected with a 465-nm blue laser through mating sleeves (ADAF2, Thorlabs) and fibre patch cables. The blue laser was magnetically mounted on the same carousel commutator.
Neural signals were recorded through a 64-channel OmniPlex data acquisition system (Plexon). The neural signals used for model-based pain detection were spiking rates of individual neurons. Online sorted neural spikes from individual neurons and raw, unfiltered wide-band signals were recorded at a sampling rate of 40 kHz. Online sorted spike timestamps were used for real-time close-loop pain onset detection. Raw wide-band signals were saved for offline sorting and further data analysis. In addition, real-time pain onset decoding timestamps, synchronized nociceptive stimuli or control stimuli timestamps, as well as autonomous triggered blue laser onset timestamps, were all recorded as digital events in the raw data.
The spikes were thresholded from high-pass-filtered (>300 Hz) raw neural signals and further online spike-sorted using the 2D polygon method (PlexonControl, Plexon). Only spikes with high signal-to-noise ratio (>3) were selected for BMI population decoding. Online sorted spike time events were packaged and sent to BMI client software through Plexon application program interfaces with 50-ms bin size. The SSM calculated the output inference of the current latent variable based on the binned spike counts. The model triggered an optogenetic stimulation if the threshold criteria were met. In the meantime, the raw neural signals, online sorted spikes, multiple event timestamps, including pain stimulus events, pain onset detection events and optogenetic stimulus events, were recorded through PlexControl (Plexon) for further offline data analysis.
For optogenetic stimulation, the blue laser was controlled by the output of an OmniPlex digital 5-V TTL system. The optical fibre tip output power was calibrated before experiments. The parameters for optogenetic stimulation were 20 Hz with a pulse width of 10 ms and duration of 5 s. For control experiments, during the Hargeaves test, the experimenter manually turned on PFC stimulation continuously whenever a thermal stimulus was applied67.
During recording, three video cameras (DMK23U, Imaging Source, FDR-AX53, Sony) were used to record both rat behaviour and BMI client software online-decoding results. The cameras were synchronized with neural recording at the beginning of each recording session. Long inter-trial intervals were used between trials to avoid behavioural or neural sensitization.
State-space method for detecting the onset of pain signalsPain perception is a dynamic process, and the pain percept can be modelled as an abstract latent variable. In our previous work, we formulated the problem of detecting the onset of pain signals as a change-point detection problem57,58. The detection problem was resolved by a state-space analysis, where the SSM consists of a state equation and a measurement equation96. In state equation (1), we assume that the temporal neural activityyk(k= 1, …,K), represented by aC-dimensional vector, is driven by a common 1D latent Markovian processzk:where\({\it{\epsilon }}_k\)specifies a temporal Gaussian prior (with zero mean and varianceσ2) on the latent process, and 0 < |a|<1 is the first-order autoregressive coefficient. In measurement equations (2) and (3), we assumed the Poisson linear dynamical system for neuronal ensemble spikes, with the observation vectorykconsisting of spike count ofCneurons (bin sizeΔ), where the logarithm of the neuronal firing rate,ηk, is modulated by a weight factor in vectorcplus a d.c. termd:The modulation parameter in vectorcdetermines the modulation degree of each neuron. A high absolute value of the modulation indicates that the neuron is likely to be pain-modulated. The second equation is a generalized linear model that employs an exponential link function throughηk, whereykis Poisson distributed with the rate parameter exp(ηk).
During the training phase, we have developed an iterative expectation maximization algorithm to infer latent state sequences (E-step) and unknown parametersΘ, whereΘ= {a,c,d,σ2} (M-step). This model estimation was completed in a few calibration trials at the beginning of each BMI experiment. We used evoked pain trials in training, because the parametercreflects the degree of pain modulation for each neuron. Data from the baseline alone were not sufficient to infer the pain-modulation coefficients for pain-modulated neurons. However, the parametersaanddcould be estimated from the baseline without evoked pain trials, or could be updated from time to time through the interactive GUI.
Upon model identification, in the testing trials, an online recursive filter was run to estimate the latent state estimate\(\hat z_k\)57,58. Specifically, the recursive filtering operations consisted of a prediction step (equations (4)–(6)) and an update step (equations (7) and (8)) as follows:whereQk|k− 1andQk|kdenote the predicted and filtered state variance, respectively. The posterior state variance was derived from a Gaussian approximation of the log-posterior, which is the sum of a log-Gaussian prior and a log-Poisson likelihood97. We then used the filtered latent state estimate\(\hat z_{k|k}\)to compute theZ-score related to the baseline (equation (9)) and further converted it to probability or one-tailedPvalue23.
We monitored the probability to assess the significance of change point detection. The criterion ofZ-score change was determined by a critical threshold for reaching statistical significance. The first time point that crossed the significance threshold for the change point was treated as the onset of pain. Using the 95% confidence interval (CI), it was concluded that this is whenZ-score − CI > 1.65 orZ-score + CI < −1.65, where the CI denotes the confidence interval derived from the state posterior variance. The same decoding strategy for acute pain was used to detect putative spontaneous pain, where we trained the model parametercone to three trials before detection.
BMI software developmentThe BMI software that manages the operation of the system was run on a desktop PC (Intel Xeon E5-1620 CPU, 3.5 GHz, 48 GB memory, Window OS). The software supported the hardware system for online neural decoding analysis and the GUI.
The components and tasks of the BMI system were managed by client software including the following modules: (1) data acquisition and buffering, (2) online neural encoding/decoding algorithms, (3) external device control, (4) configuration management and (5) user interfaces. We developed the software in the C/C++ programming language along with the software developing toolkit provided by Plexon and other open-source software packages. To accommodate maximum flexibility while minimizing the complexity of maintenance, the functional modules in the software were designed with encapsulation for decoupling purposes.
Proper buffering was required for both the streaming neural signals and the decoding analysis results. In the online BMI experiments, although the total recording time lasted for an hour or more, only the recent recorded data contributed to the detection analysis (for example, computation of theZ-score and its confidence intervals) of the current time point. Therefore, we used a small buffer space to store the newest data and updated the buffer when new data arrived. To minimize the data transfer cost in the buffer space, we used a circular buffering strategy; namely, the newest data always overwrote the oldest.
The software consists of multiple task threads98. To avoid mutual blocking between multiple tasks, we assigned different tasks on multiple threads running in parallel. The task threads included the acquisition thread, training threads, online decoding threads, user interface (UI) thread and external device controlling thread (Supplementary Fig.
1d). A custom GUI was designed and managed by the UI thread, allowing the visualization of the streaming neural signals as well as the response for user operations (Supplementary Fig.
1e).
CFA administrationTo induce chronic inflammatory pain, 0.1 ml of CFA (Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Sigma-Aldrich) was suspended in an oil saline 1:1 emulsion and injected subcutaneously into the plantar aspect of the hind paw. CFA injections were administered into the paw contralateral to the implanted recording electrodes.
SNI procedureThe SNI procedure was performed as described previously99. After rats were anaesthetized with isoflurane (1.5–2%), the skin on the lateral surface of the thighs was incised. The bicep femoris was dissected to expose the sciatic nerve and its three terminal branches: sural, common peroneal and tibial nerves. The common peroneal and tibial nerves were tied off with non-absorbent 5-0 silk sutures at the proximal point of the trifurcation, and then cut distal to each knot to prevent reattachments. The muscle layer was then sutured closed with 4-0 absorbable sutures and the skin was sutured closed with 3-0 silk sutures. The SNI procedure was performed on the side contralateral to the implanted recording electrodes.
Hargreaves testThe Hargreaves test (plantar test) was performed to evaluate the rats’ responses to acute thermal stimulation. A mobile radiant heat-emitting device with an aperture of 10 mm (37370 plantar test, Ugo Basile) was used to produce acute thermal stimulation of the plantar surface of the hind paw. The rats were placed in a Plexiglass chamber over a Hargreaves glass table and allowed to habituate. An average of at least five trials were performed to measure the latency to paw withdrawal for each testing condition. This latency was automatically recorded, and an average latency across the trials was computed. Paw withdrawals resulting from locomotion or weight shifting were not counted, and the trials were repeated in such cases. Measurements were repeated at ~5-min intervals. An IR intensity of 70 was used to provide noxious stimulation and an IR intensity of 10 as a control for non-noxious thermal stimulation that was not noxious. IR stimuli were terminated by paw withdrawals or held continuously for 5 s.
For online BMI experiments, the SSM was first trained with one to five trials (‘calibration trials’) of noxious stimulus at the beginning of the experiment. Following training, an average of at least five trials were performed with activation of the BMI to test the efficacy of the BMI in inhibiting peripheral pain response. Measurements were repeated at 3- to 5-min intervals.
Mechanical pain detectionRats with optical fibre and silicon probe implants were given 30 min to habituate in a Plexiglass chamber over a mesh table. The SSM was trained using a noxious stimulus (PP in naïve rats and 6 g vF in CFA- or SNI-treated rats). The noxious stimulus was applied to the plantar surface of the hind paw contralateral to the ACC recording site, in freely moving rats. Noxious stimulations were terminated by paw withdrawal. Following model training, a period of rest was given to the rats to avoid behavioural or neural hypersensitivity. A total of 20–25 trials were then performed with each stimulus (equal number for each stimulation type with variable inter-trial intervals) to generate spike raster plots and to assess pain detection accuracy. As a control, a non-noxious stimulus (6 g vF in naïve rats and 0.4 g vF in CFA- or SNI-treated rats) was delivered to the plantar surface of the hind paw contralateral to the brain recording site in free-moving rats. Non-noxious stimulations were applied for ~5 s or until paw withdrawal.
Mechanical allodynia testA Dixon up–down method with vF filaments was used to measure mechanical allodynia99. Before testing, the rats were placed in a Plexiglass container over a mesh table and acclimated for 20 min. A set of logarithmically incremental stiffness (0.45, 0.75, 1.20, 2.55, 4.40, 6.10, 10.50, 15.10 g) was applied to the hind paw to calculate the 50% withdrawal thresholds.
For BMI experiments, CFA- or SNI-treated rats with optical fibre and electrode implants were placed in a Plexiglass chamber over a mesh table and allowed to habituate. One to five trials of 6 g vF stimulus delivered to the hind paw of a rat were used to train the SSM. Subsequently, the rats were allowed a period of rest to avoid hypersensitivity. The testing trials followed the Dixon up–down method. Trials with detection were used to calculate 50% withdrawal thresholds. All stimulations were applied to the plantar surface of the hind paw contralateral to the brain recording site.
CPA test for evoked painCPA experiments were conducted in a connected two-chamber device. Animal movements in each chamber were recorded by a high-speed camera from above the chamber and analysed with ANY-maze software (Stoelting Co.), followed by visual verification of the recorded videos by an independent experimenter. The CPA protocol consists of preconditioning (baseline), conditioning and testing phases. During the 10-min preconditioning, the rats were allowed to move freely between the two chambers, and the time spent in each chamber was recorded. Rats that spent more than 500 s or less than 100 s in each chamber during the preconditioning phase were not used in further testing. After the training of the model, the rats were then conditioned with either BMI or random optogenetic activation of the PFC. One of the chambers was paired with BMI and the other with random optogenetic activation of matching intensity, number and duration (control). The animal was confined to one of the associated chambers during each conditioning phase. During conditioning with BMI, the total number and duration of optogenetic activation events were calculated. The same number and duration of optogenetic activation were randomly delivered in the opposite control chamber. Optogenetic activation and chamber pairings were counterbalanced. The same peripheral stimulus was used in both chambers during the conditioning. PP and 6 g vF (control) were used for the testing of naïve rats. For experiments with CFA- and SNI-treated rats, 6 g vF and 0.4 g vF (control) were used to deliver a peripheral stimulus to the hind paw, whereas a 6 g stimulus was used to train the model. During the test phase, the animal was not given any peripheral stimulus or optogenetic activation and had access to move freely between the chambers. The time spent in each chamber was recorded and analysed.
CPA test for spontaneous or tonic painCPA experiments were conducted for CFA- or SNI-treated rats in a connected two-chamber device. Animal movements in each chamber were recorded by a high-speed camera from above the chamber and analysed with the ANY-maze software, followed by visual verification of the recorded videos by an independent experimenter. The CPA protocol consists of preconditioning (baseline), conditioning and testing phases. During the 10 min of preconditioning, rats were allowed to move freely between the two chambers, and the time spent in each chamber was recorded. Rats that spent more than 500 s or less than 100 s in each chamber during the preconditioning phase were not used in further analysis. Following preconditioning, the SSM was trained with 6 g vF stimulation of the hind paw. During conditioning (60 min total), no peripheral stimulus was given, but rats received either BMI-triggered optogenetic activation of the prelimbic PFC or random PFC (control) activations of matching duration and intensity. The animals were confined to one of the associated chambers during each conditioning phase. During conditioning with BMI, the total number and duration of optogenetic activation events were calculated, and the same number and duration of activation events were randomly delivered in the opposite control chamber. Furthermore, optogenetic activation and chamber pairings were counterbalanced. During the test phase, animals were not given any peripheral stimulus or optogenetic activation and had access to move freely between the chambers. The time spent in each chamber was recorded and analysed.
A total of 30 rats were used for all experiments. A subset of rats underwent acute pain assays including the Hargreaves test and CPA for evoked pain prior to chronic pain experiments. These rats were allowed sufficient time (one week) to recover after acute pain assays and rest, before the onset of chronic pain experiments.
ImmunohistochemistryRats were deeply anaesthetized with isoflurane and transcardially perfused with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and paraformaldehyde (PFA). After extraction, brains were fixed in 4% PFA overnight and then transferred to 30% sucrose in PBS to be cryoprotected for three days66. Next, 20-µm coronal sections were collected using a Leica CM3050S cryostat (Leica Biosystems), washed in PBS and coverslipped with Vectashield mounting medium. Sections from brains containing electrodes were stained with Cresyl violet and imaged at ×10 magnification with an Axio Zoom widefield microscope (Carl Zeiss). Sections were also made after viral transfer for opsin verification, and these sections were stained with anti-rabbit green fluorescent protein (1:500, #AB290, Abcam), CaMKII-a (6G9) mouse monoclonal antibody (mAb) (1:200, #50049, Cell Signaling Technology) antibodies, and coverslipped with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (1:200, Vector Laboratories). Secondary antibodies were anti-rabbit immunoglobulin-G (IgG) conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488, and anti-mouse IgG conjugated to Alexa Fluor 647 (1:200, Life Technologies). Images were acquired with a Zeiss LSM 700 confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss).
Statistics and reproducibilityThe neural data and behaviour data were analysed offline by custom MATLAB (version 2018, MathWorks) scripts, NeuroExplorer (Version 5.0, NeuroExplorer) and GraphPad Prism Version 8 software (GraphPad). Online-sorted spikes were further offline spike-sorted by Offline Sorter (4.0, Plexon). For each sorted neuron, a peri-stimulation time histogram was generated 5 s before and after the onset of the peripheral stimulus with 100-ms bin size. The normalizedZ-score firing rates at each bin was calculated by the following equation:Z= (FR − mean of FRb)/standard deviation of FRb, where FR indicates firing rate and FRbindicates the baseline firing rate before stimulus. A positive or negative response unit was defined by at least two consecutive bin firing rates being higher or lower than the mean of FRb± 3 s.d. of FRbwithin the range (0–5 s) for the Hargreaves test or (0–1 s) for the PP and vF tests. The cumulative firing rate was calculated by the MATLAB functiontrapz. Positive pain onset detection trials were defined by SSM prediction within 5 s after stimulus (0–5 s). Detection rates were calculated by positive pain onset detection trials divided by total stimulus trials. When data normality held, Student’st-test was used to compareZ-scored firing rates across different conditions, and pairedt-test was used for repeated data. Fisher’s exact test was used to analyse the population changes for pain response. When normality did not hold, we used the non-parametric rank-sum test or signed-rank test.
The results of behavioural experiments are presented as mean ± s.e.m. For mechanical allodynia, a one-way analysis of variance with repeated measures and post hoc multiple pairwise comparison Bonferroni tests was used to compute the 50% withdrawal threshold over time, whereas an unpaired Student’st-test was used to calculate the difference in allodynia between BMI and control conditions. During the CPA test, a Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used to compare the time spent in each treatment chamber before and after conditioning (that is, preconditioning versus testing phase for each chamber). A CPA score was calculated by subtracting the time spent in the more noxious chamber during the testing phase from the time spent in that chamber during the preconditioning phase. A two-tailed unpaired Student’st-test was used to compare differences in CPA scores under various testing conditions. Experimenter and data analysts were blinded to the condition of rats.
After experiments, animals were euthanized and 20-µm brain sections were collected using a Leica CM3050S cryostat machine and analysed for viral expression, optical fibre localization and electrode localization with histological staining (Supplementary Fig.
1a,b) to verify fibre or electrode placements and viral expression in the target brain regions. Animals with improper fibre or electrode placements, low viral expression or viral expression outside the target brain areas were excluded from further analysis.
Reporting SummaryFurther information on research design is available in theNature Research Reporting Summarylinked to this Article.
Data availabilityThe main data supporting the results in this study are available within the paper and itsSupplementary Information. The raw datasets generated during the study are too large to be publicly shared, yet they are available for research purposes from the corresponding authors on reasonable request.
Code availabilityThe custom BMI client software used in this study is available athttps://github.com/wangresearch1/onlinePainDecodingGUI.
ReferencesBasbaum, A. I., Bautista, D. M., Scherrer, G. & Julius, D. Cellular and molecular mechanisms of pain.
Cell139, 267–284 (2009).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarBusse, J. W. et al. Opioids for chronic noncancer pain: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
JAMA320, 2448–2460 (2018).
PubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarFinnerup, N. B. et al. Pharmacotherapy for neuropathic pain in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Lancet Neurol.
14, 162–173 (2015).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarDeer, T. R. et al. The appropriate use of neurostimulation: stimulation of the intracranial and extracranial space and head for chronic pain. Neuromodulation appropriateness consensus committee.
Neuromodulation17, 551–570 (2014).
PubMedArticleGoogle ScholarCoffey, R. J. Deep brain stimulation for chronic pain: results of two multicenter trials and a structured review.
Pain Med.
2, 183–192 (2001).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarNandi, D., Aziz, T., Carter, H. & Stein, J. Thalamic field potentials in chronic central pain treated by periventricular gray stimulation—a series of eight cases.
Pain101, 97–107 (2003).
PubMedArticleGoogle ScholarOwen, S. L. et al. Deep brain stimulation for neuropathic pain.
Acta Neurochir. Suppl.
97, 111–116 (2007).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarGreen, A. L. et al. N-of-1 trials for assessing the efficacy of deep brain stimulation in neuropathic pain.
Neuromodulation7, 76–81 (2004).
PubMedArticleGoogle ScholarBittar, R. G. et al. Deep brain stimulation for pain relief: a meta-analysis.
J. Clin. Neurosci.
12, 515–519 (2005).
PubMedArticleGoogle ScholarBoccard, S. G., Pereira, E. A., Moir, L., Aziz, T. Z. & Green, A. L. Long-term outcomes of deep brain stimulation for neuropathic pain.
Neurosurgery72, 221–230 (2013).
PubMedArticleGoogle ScholarMarchand, S., Kupers, R. C., Bushnell, M. C. & Duncan, G. H. Analgesic and placebo effects of thalamic stimulation.
Pain105, 481–488 (2003).
PubMedArticleGoogle ScholarSpooner, J., Yu, H., Kao, C., Sillay, K. & Konrad, P. Neuromodulation of the cingulum for neuropathic pain after spinal cord injury. Case report.
J. Neurosurg.
107, 169–172 (2007).
PubMedArticleGoogle ScholarBoccard, S. G. et al. Deep brain stimulation of the anterior cingulate cortex: targeting the affective component of chronic pain.
Neuroreport25, 83–88 (2014).
PubMedArticleGoogle ScholarLende, R. A., Kirsch, W. M. & Druckman, R. Relief of facial pain after combined removal of precentral and postcentral cortex.
J. Neurosurg.
34, 537–543 (1971).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarTsubokawa, T., Katayama, Y., Yamamoto, T., Hirayama, T. & Koyama, S. Chronic motor cortex stimulation for the treatment of central pain.
Acta Neurochir. Suppl.
(Wien)52, 137–139 (1991).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarKatayama, Y., Tsubokawa, T. & Yamamoto, T. Chronic motor cortex stimulation for central deafferentation pain: experience with bulbar pain secondary to Wallenberg syndrome.
Stereotact. Funct. Neurosurg.
62, 295–299 (1994).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarKatayama, Y., Fukaya, C. & Yamamoto, T. Poststroke pain control by chronic motor cortex stimulation: neurological characteristics predicting a favorable response.
J. Neurosurg.
89, 585–591 (1998).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarHerregodts, P., Stadnik, T., De Ridder, F. & D’Haens, J. Cortical stimulation for central neuropathic pain: 3-D surface MRI for easy determination of the motor cortex.
Acta Neurochir. Suppl.
64, 132–135 (1995).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarEbel, H., Rust, D., Tronnier, V., Boker, D. & Kunze, S. Chronic precentral stimulation in trigeminal neuropathic pain.
Acta Neurochir. (Wien)138, 1300–1306 (1996).
CASArticleGoogle ScholarNguyen, J. P. et al. [Treatment of central and neuropathic facial pain by chronic stimulation of the motor cortex: value of neuronavigation guidance systems for the localization of the motor cortex].
Neurochirurgie46, 483–491 (2000).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarGarcia-Larrea, L. et al. Electrical stimulation of motor cortex for pain control: a combined PET-scan and electrophysiological study.
Pain83, 259–273 (1999).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarLenz, F. A., Kwan, H. C., Dostrovsky, J. O. & Tasker, R. R. Characteristics of the bursting pattern of action potentials that occurs in the thalamus of patients with central pain.
Brain Res.
496, 357–360 (1989).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarTasker, R. R., Gorecki, J., Lenz, F. A., Hirayama, T. & Dostrovsky, J. O. Thalamic microelectrode recording and microstimulation in central and deafferentation pain.
Appl. Neurophysiol.
50, 414–417 (1987).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarLenz, F. A. et al. Abnormal single-unit activity recorded in the somatosensory thalamus of a quadriplegic patient with central pain.
Pain31, 225–236 (1987).
PubMedArticleGoogle ScholarMazars, G., Merienne, L. & Cioloca, C. [Treatment of certain types of pain with implantable thalamic stimulators].
Neurochirurgie20, 117–124 (1974).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarMazars, G., Merienne, L. & Ciolocca, C. [Intermittent analgesic thalamic stimulation. Preliminary note].
Rev. Neurol. (Paris)128, 273–279 (1973).
CASGoogle ScholarTurnbull, I. M., Shulman, R. & Woodhurst, W. B. Thalamic stimulation for neuropathic pain.
J. Neurosurg.
52, 486–493 (1980).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarRichardson, D. E. & Akil, H. Pain reduction by electrical brain stimulation in man. Part 1: acute administration in periaqueductal and periventricular sites.
J. Neurosurg.
47, 178–183 (1977).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarRichardson, D. E. & Akil, H. Pain reduction by electrical brain stimulation in man. Part 2: chronic self-administration in the periventricular gray matter.
J. Neurosurg.
47, 184–194 (1977).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarHosobuchi, Y., Adams, J. E. & Linchitz, R. Pain relief by electrical stimulation of the central gray matter in humans and its reversal by naloxone.
Science197, 183–186 (1977).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarBoccard, S. G., Pereira, E. A. & Aziz, T. Z. Deep brain stimulation for chronic pain.
J. Clin. Neurosci.
22, 1537–1543 (2015).
PubMedArticleGoogle ScholarSadtler, P. T. et al. Neural constraints on learning.
Nature512, 423–426 (2014).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarBerenyi, A., Belluscio, M., Mao, D. & Buzsaki, G. Closed-loop control of epilepsy by transcranial electrical stimulation.
Science337, 735–737 (2012).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarBergey, G. K. et al. Long-term treatment with responsive brain stimulation in adults with refractory partial seizures.
Neurology84, 810–817 (2015).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarHeck, C. N. et al. Two-year seizure reduction in adults with medically intractable partial onset epilepsy treated with responsive neurostimulation: final results of the RNS System Pivotal trial.
Epilepsia55, 432–441 (2014).
PubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarMorrell, M. J. & RNS System in Epilepsy Study Group. Responsive cortical stimulation for the treatment of medically intractable partial epilepsy.
Neurology77, 1295–1304 (2011).
PubMedArticleGoogle ScholarAjiboye, A. B. et al. Restoration of reaching and grasping movements through brain-controlled muscle stimulation in a person with tetraplegia: a proof-of-concept demonstration.
Lancet389, 1821–1830 (2017).
PubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarTaylor, D. M., Tillery, S. I. & Schwartz, A. B. Direct cortical control of 3D neuroprosthetic devices.
Science296, 1829–1832 (2002).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarHochberg, L. R. et al. Neuronal ensemble control of prosthetic devices by a human with tetraplegia.
Nature442, 164–171 (2006).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarHochberg, L. R. et al. Reach and grasp by people with tetraplegia using a neurally controlled robotic arm.
Nature485, 372–375 (2012).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarCollinger, J. L. et al. High-performance neuroprosthetic control by an individual with tetraplegia.
Lancet381, 557–564 (2013).
PubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarAflalo, T. et al. Neurophysiology. Decoding motor imagery from the posterior parietal cortex of a tetraplegic human.
Science348, 906–910 (2015).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarWenger, N. et al. Closed-loop neuromodulation of spinal sensorimotor circuits controls refined locomotion after complete spinal cord injury.
Sci. Transl. Med.
6, 255ra133 (2014).
PubMedArticleCASGoogle ScholarWagner, F. B. et al. Targeted neurotechnology restores walking in humans with spinal cord injury.
Nature563, 65–71 (2018).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarAnumanchipalli, G. K., Chartier, J. & Chang, E. F. Speech synthesis from neural decoding of spoken sentences.
Nature568, 493–498 (2019).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarShanechi, M. M. Brain–machine interfaces from motor to mood.
Nat. Neurosci.
22, 1554–1564 (2019).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarGrosenick, L., Marshel, J. H. & Deisseroth, K. Closed-loop and activity-guided optogenetic control.
Neuron86, 106–139 (2015).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarMickle, A. D. et al. A wireless closed-loop system for optogenetic peripheral neuromodulation.
Nature565, 361–365 (2019).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarTurnbull, I. M. Bilateral cingulumotomy combined with thalamotomy or mesencephalic tractotomy for pain.
Surg. Gynecol. Obstet.
134, 958–962 (1972).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarRainville, P., Duncan, G. H., Price, D. D., Carrier, B. & Bushnell, M. C. Pain affect encoded in human anterior cingulate but not somatosensory cortex.
Science277, 968–971 (1997).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarFoltz, E. L. & White, L. E. The role of rostral cingulumotomy in ‘pain’ relief.
Int. J. Neurol.
6, 353–373 (1968).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarQu, C. et al. Lesion of the rostral anterior cingulate cortex eliminates the aversiveness of spontaneous neuropathic pain following partial or complete axotomy.
Pain152, 1641–1648 (2011).
PubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarJohansen, J. P., Fields, H. L. & Manning, B. H. The affective component of pain in rodents: direct evidence for a contribution of the anterior cingulate cortex.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA98, 8077–8082 (2001).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarLaGraize, S. C., Borzan, J., Peng, Y. B. & Fuchs, P. N. Selective regulation of pain affect following activation of the opioid anterior cingulate cortex system.
Exp. Neurol.
197, 22–30 (2006).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarLubar, J. F. Effect of medial cortical lesions on the avoidance behavior of the cat.
J. Comp. Physiol. Psychol.
58, 38–46 (1964).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarMelzack, R & Casey, L. InThe Skin Senses(eds Kenshalo, D. R.) 423–439 (Charles C Thomas, 1968).
Chen, Z., Zhang, Q., Tong, A. P., Manders, T. R. & Wang, J. Deciphering neuronal population codes for acute thermal pain.
J. Neural Eng.
14, 036023 (2017).
PubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarHu, S., Zhang, Q., Wang, J. & Chen, Z. Real-time particle filtering and smoothing algorithms for detecting abrupt changes in neural ensemble spike activity.
J. Neurophysiol.
119, 1394–1410 (2018).
PubMedArticleGoogle ScholarZhang, Q. et al. Chronic pain induces generalized enhancement of aversion.
eLife6, e25302 (2017).
PubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarLewin, W. & Whitty, C. W. Effects of anterior cingulate stimulation in conscious human subjects.
J. Neurophysiol.
23, 445–447 (1960).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarBuchel, C. et al. Dissociable neural responses related to pain intensity, stimulus intensity, and stimulus awareness within the anterior cingulate cortex: a parametric single-trial laser functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
J. Neurosci.
22, 970–976 (2002).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarMeda, K. S. et al. Microcircuit mechanisms through which mediodorsal thalamic input to anterior cingulate cortex exacerbates pain-related aversion.
Neuron102, 944–959 (2019).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarHutchison, W. D., Davis, K. D., Lozano, A. M., Tasker, R. R. & Dostrovsky, J. O. Pain-related neurons in the human cingulate cortex.
Nat. Neurosci.
2, 403–405 (1999).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarSikes, R. W. & Vogt, B. A. Nociceptive neurons in area 24 of rabbit cingulate cortex.
J. Neurophysiol.
68, 1720–1732 (1992).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarLi, X. Y. et al. Alleviating neuropathic pain hypersensitivity by inhibiting PKMzeta in the anterior cingulate cortex.
Science330, 1400–1404 (2010).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarSingh, A. et al. Mapping cortical integration of sensory and affective pain pathways.
Curr. Biol.
30, 1703–1715 (2020).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarLee, M. et al. Activation of corticostriatal circuitry relieves chronic neuropathic pain.
J. Neurosci.
35, 5247–5259 (2015).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarMartinez, E. et al. Corticostriatal regulation of acute pain.
Front. Cell. Neurosci.
11, 146 (2017).
PubMedPubMed CentralArticleCASGoogle ScholarZhang, Z. et al. Role of prelimbic GABAergic circuits in sensory and emotional aspects of neuropathic pain.
Cell Rep.
12, 752–759 (2015).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarHardy, S. G. Analgesia elicited by prefrontal stimulation.
Brain Res.
339, 281–284 (1985).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarKiritoshi, T., Ji, G. & Neugebauer, V. Rescue of impaired mGluR5-driven endocannabinoid signaling restores prefrontal cortical output to inhibit pain in arthritic rats.
J. Neurosci.
36, 837–850 (2016).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarDale, J. et al. Scaling up cortical control inhibits pain.
Cell Rep.
23, 1301–1313 (2018).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarJi, G. et al. Cognitive impairment in pain through amygdala-driven prefrontal cortical deactivation.
J. Neurosci.
30, 5451–5464 (2010).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarHuang, J. et al. A neuronal circuit for activating descending modulation of neuropathic pain.
Nat. Neurosci.
22, 1659–1668 (2019).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarCheriyan, J. & Sheets, P. L. Altered excitability and local connectivity of mPFC-PAG neurons in a mouse model of neuropathic pain.
J. Neurosci.
38, 4829–4839 (2018).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarMetz, A. E., Yau, H. J., Centeno, M. V., Apkarian, A. V. & Martina, M. Morphological and functional reorganization of rat medial prefrontal cortex in neuropathic pain.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA106, 2423–2428 (2009).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarVertes, R. P. Interactions among the medial prefrontal cortex, hippocampus and midline thalamus in emotional and cognitive processing in the rat.
Neuroscience142, 1–20 (2006).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarApkarian, A. V. et al. Chronic back pain is associated with decreased prefrontal and thalamic gray matter density.
J. Neurosci.
24, 10410–10415 (2004).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarZhou, H. et al. Ketamine reduces aversion in rodent pain models by suppressing hyperactivity of the anterior cingulate cortex.
Nat. Commun.
9, 3751 (2018).
PubMedPubMed CentralArticleCASGoogle ScholarKing, T. et al. Unmasking the tonic-aversive state in neuropathic pain.
Nat. Neurosci.
12, 1364–1366 (2009).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarDecosterd, I. & Woolf, C. J. Spared nerve injury: an animal model of persistent peripheral neuropathic pain.
Pain87, 149–158 (2000).
PubMedArticleGoogle ScholarDe Felice, M. et al. Capturing the aversive state of cephalic pain preclinically.
Ann. Neurol.
74, 257–265 (2013).
CASPubMedGoogle ScholarNavratilova, E. et al. Endogenous opioid activity in the anterior cingulate cortex is required for relief of pain.
J. Neurosci.
35, 7264–7271 (2015).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarJohansen, J. P. & Fields, H. L. Glutamatergic activation of anterior cingulate cortex produces an aversive teaching signal.
Nat. Neurosci.
7, 398–403 (2004).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarXiao, Z. et al. Cortical pain processing in the rat anterior cingulate cortex and primary somatosensory cortex.
Front. Cell. Neurosci.
13, 165 (2019).
PubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarKarim, F., Wang, C. C. & Gereau, R. W. T. Metabotropic glutamate receptor subtypes 1 and 5 are activators of extracellular signal-regulated kinase signaling required for inflammatory pain in mice.
J. Neurosci.
21, 3771–3779 (2001).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarHu, H. J., Alter, B. J., Carrasquillo, Y., Qiu, C. S. & Gereau, R. W. T. Metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 modulates nociceptive plasticity via extracellular signal-regulated kinase-Kv4.2 signaling in spinal cord dorsal horn neurons.
J. Neurosci.
27, 13181–13191 (2007).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarO’Callaghan, J. P. & Holtzman, S. G. Quantification of the analgesic activity of narcotic antagonists by a modified hot-plate procedure.
J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.
192, 497–505 (1975).
PubMedGoogle ScholarCheppudira, B. P. Characterization of hind paw licking and lifting to noxious radiant heat in the rat with and without chronic inflammation.
J. Neurosci. Methods155, 122–125 (2006).
PubMedArticleGoogle ScholarKang, S. J. et al. Bidirectional modulation of hyperalgesia via the specific control of excitatory and inhibitory neuronal activity in the ACC.
Mol. Brain8, 81 (2015).
PubMedPubMed CentralArticleCASGoogle ScholarLangford, D. J. et al. Coding of facial expressions of pain in the laboratory mouse.
Nat. Methods7, 447–449 (2010).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarTappe-Theodor, A. & Kuner, R. Studying ongoing and spontaneous pain in rodents—challenges and opportunities.
Eur. J. Neurosci.
39, 1881–1890 (2014).
PubMedArticleGoogle ScholarBeric, A. et al. Complications of deep brain stimulation surgery.
Stereotact. Funct. Neurosurg.
77, 73–78 (2001).
CASPubMedArticleGoogle ScholarAlomar, S. et al. Speech and language adverse effects after thalamotomy and deep brain stimulation in patients with movement disorders: a meta-analysis.
Mov. Disord.
32, 53–63 (2017).
PubMedArticleGoogle ScholarXiao, Z. et al. Ensembles of change-point detectors: implications for real-time BMI applications.
J. Comput. Neurosci.
46, 107–124 (2019).
PubMedArticleGoogle ScholarChen, Z.
Advanced State Space Methods for Neural and Clinical Data(Cambridge Univ. Press, 2015).
Eden, U. T., Frank, L. M., Barbieri, R., Solo, V. & Brown, E. N. Dynamic analysis of neural encoding by point process adaptive filtering.
Neural Comput.
16, 971–998 (2004).
PubMedArticleGoogle ScholarHu, S., Zhang, Q., Wang, J. & Chen, Z. A real-time rodent neural interface for deciphering acute pain signals from neuronal ensemble spike activity.
Proc. 51st Asilomar Conference on Signals,Systems and Computers93–97 (IEEE, 2017).
Wang, J. et al. A single subanesthetic dose of ketamine relieves depression-like behaviors induced by neuropathic pain in rats.
Anesthesiology115, 812–821 (2011).
CASPubMedPubMed CentralArticleGoogle ScholarDownload referencesAcknowledgementsThis work was supported by NIH grants R01-GM115384 (J.W.), R01-NS100065 (Z.S.C. and J.W.) and R01-MH118928 (Z.S.C.) and NSF grant CBET-1835000 (Z.S.C. and J.W.).
Author informationAffiliationsDepartment of Anesthesiology, Perioperative Care and Pain, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, USAQiaosheng Zhang, Robert Talay, Yaling Liu, Anna Li, Amrita Singh & Jing WangDepartment of Psychiatry, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, USASile Hu, Zhengdong Xiao, David Rosenberg, Guanghao Sun, Bassir Caravan & Zhe S. ChenCollege of Arts and Sciences, New York University, New York, NY, USAJonathan D. GouldDepartment of Neuroscience & Physiology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, USAZhe S. Chen & Jing WangNeuroscience Institute, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, USAZhe S. Chen & Jing WangYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarContributionsJ.W. and Z.S.C. conceived and designed the study. Q.Z. designed the 3D drive, performed the surgeries and implemented the BMI hardware system. Q.Z., S.H., R.T., A.S., B.C., Z.X., D.R., Y.L., G.S., A.L. and J.D.G. collected the data. Q.Z., A.S., Z.X., J.D.G. and R.T. analysed the data. S.H., Z.X., Q.Z. and Z.S.C. contributed to BMI software development. J.W. and Z.S.C. supervised the project. J.W. and Z.S.C. wrote the manuscript, with input from the other authors.
Corresponding authorsCorrespondence toZhe S. ChenorJing Wang.
Ethics declarationsCompeting interestsThe authors declare no competing interests.
Additional informationPeer review informationNature Biomedical Engineeringthanks the anonymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Publisher’s noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Supplementary informationSupplementary InformationSupplementary Figs. 1–9 and Table 1.
Reporting SummaryRights and permissionsReprints and PermissionsAbout this articleCite this articleZhang, Q., Hu, S., Talay, R.
et al.
A prototype closed-loop brain–machine interface for the study and treatment of pain.
Nat Biomed Eng(2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-021-00736-7Download citationReceived:09 March 2020Accepted:22 April 2021Published:21 June 2021DOI:https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-021-00736-7Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.
Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiativeYou have full access to this article via your institution.
Associated ContentCollectionTechnology for neuroengineeringAdvertisementExplore contentAbout the journalPublish with usSearchAdvanced searchQuick linksNature Biomedical Engineering (Nat. Biomed. Eng)ISSN2157-846X(online)nature.com sitemapDiscover contentPublishing policiesAuthor & Researcher servicesLibraries & institutionsAdvertising & partnershipsCareer developmentRegional websitesLegal & Privacy© 2022 Springer Nature LimitedSign up for theNature Briefingnewsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily.
