old id = 3099
NVIDIA Omniverse™ Platform | NVIDIA Developer
2021
https://developer.nvidia.com/nvidia-omniverse-platform

Develop with NVIDIA OmniverseNVIDIA Omniverse™ is a scalable, multi-GPU real-time reference development platform for 3D simulation and design collaboration, and based on Pixar's Universal Scene Description and NVIDIA RTX™ technology.
NVIDIA Omniverse is built from the ground up to be easily extensible and customizable with amodular development framework. While end-users and content creators leverage the Omniverse platform to connect and accelerate their 3D workflows, developers can plug into the platform layer of the Omniverse stack to easily build new tools and services.
Develop Quality Tools, Faster than EverThe modular, easily extensible and flexible platform replaces strict monolithic development. With low- and no-code Python-based development, teams can produce quickly, efficiently, and sustainably.
Build More Advanced Technology with Minimal EffortSave time and effort and leverage over 20 years of core NVIDIA rendering technologies, AI, and simulation SDKs by building on the Omniverse platform. Source is available for over 300 pre-built Omniverse Extensions that you can inspect, tweak, or incorporate wholly into your projects and distribution.
Connect to New Markets, Expand Your AudiencesTake advantage of NVIDIA’s reach across all industries, audiences, and workflows and gain access to new markets and use cases to grow your user base.
Developer licensing and pricing information is now available.
Universal Scene DescriptionThe fundamental representation of assets in Omniverse isPixar’s open-source Universal Scene Description (USD), a powerful scene representation and interchange framework that enables complex property inheritance, instancing, layering, lazy loading, and a wide variety of other key features. Omniverse uses USD for interchange through the Nucleus DB service.
Platform ComponentsOmniverse consists of 5 key parts:Nucleus, Connect, Kit, Simulation, and RTX Renderer. These components, along with interoperable third-party digital content creation (DCC) tools and renderers - and third-party and NVIDIA-builtextensions,apps, andmicroservicesmake up the full Omniverse ecosystem.
NucleusConnectKitSimulationRTX RendererOmniverse Nucleus is the database and collaboration engine of the Omniverse platform. It allows a variety of client applications, renderers, and microservices to share and modify representations of virtual worlds.
Nucleus operates under a publish/subscribe model. Omniverse clients can publish modifications to digital assets and virtual worlds to Nucleus or subscribe to their changes that are transmitted in real time between applications with bi-directional Omniverse Connectors. Nucleus can be installed in multiple ways: on a workstation, on-premises, or in a private cloud.
There aremultiple ways to connect asset librariesand DCC tools to Omniverse, with varying fidelity. Omniverse Connectors—plugins that enable client applications to connect to Nucleus and publish and subscribe to individual assets and full worlds—provide the highest fidelity connections to Omniverse, often enabling a live-sync workflow between client applications andOmniverse Apps.
Developers canbuild their own Connectorsusing theOmniverse Connect SDK, available for free in the Omniverse Launcher.
Unlike monolithic development platforms, Omniverse is built to be extremely modular for maximum flexibility and extensibility. Omniverse Kit is a powerful toolkit for developers to build their own extensions, apps, microservices, or plugins for their ecosystem. The SDK can be run headless as a microservice, or with a UI. The UI application can be fully written using the UI engine which enables it to be fully customized.
The Omniverse platform gives developers access to NVIDIA’s scalable, physically accurate world simulation, powered by NVIDIA’s core physics simulation technologies. Developers can leverage and incorporate these key technologies by developing on or connecting to the Omniverse platform, includingNVIDIA PhysX- an advanced physics simulator delivering high-performance rigid, deformable, and vehicle dynamics,PhysX Flowfor combustible fluid, smoke and fire dynamics, andPhysX Blast- for fracture and destruction.
The platform natively supports renderers compliant with Pixar’s Hydra architecture.
Omniverse also features an advanced, multi-GPU scalable renderer accelerated byRTX technology. End users can easily toggle between real-time ray traced mode for ultra-fast interactive performance, and referenced path-traced mode for final-frame cinematic quality.
Developers without the desire to build their own renderer can enhance their user base’s capabilities by connecting to the Omniverse platform to leverage either the Omniverse RTX Renderer or any connected Hydra-delegate renderers.
Building on OmniverseIndependent or enterprise developers can easily build and sell their ownExtensions,Apps,Connectors,andMicroserviceson the Omniverse platform with the wealth of available tools and samples.
Omniverse ExtensionsOmniverse Extensionsare small pieces of code purpose-built to achieve a specific task. Extensions are authored in Python, enabling developers of any level to build or customize their own extensions. Explore an extract of the extensions available in the Omniverse platform below to see what is possible.
Core ExtensionsNVIDIA offers source code forover 200 extensionsthat can easily be leveraged by developers as part of their workflows, with more constantly being created. The collection includes a robust collection of content browsers extensions, from USD widgets and window extensions, to UI extensions, and more.
AI Toy Box ExtensionsTheOmniverse AI Toy Box Extensionsare a family of AI-powered tools for creators and researchers to enhance their 3D workflows. The first AI Toy Box extensionGANverse3D - Image2Carwas built by NVIDIA’s AI Toronto Lab team. Based on a generative adversarial network (GAN) trained on 2D photos, synthesizing multiple views of thousands of objects to predict 3D geometry, texture, and part segmentation labels. The extension allows inexperienced 3D artists to easily create 3D, drivable models of cars from only a 2D image of a car - complete with realistic headlights, blinkers, and wheels.
HDR Light StudioLightmap has built anOmniverse Extension for HDR Light Studio, an application that adds live HDRI map authoring and live HDRI textured Area Lights which gives image-makers the professional controls and content they need to light beautiful imagery in Omniverse.
Replica StudiosReplica Studiosis a Voice AI platform that enables developers and creators to tell stories and voice over with the power of AI voice technology. Replica Studios built an Omniverse Extension to enable creators across industries to create a seamless animation workflow between design applications.
Omniverse AppsEveryOmniverse app, such asOmniverse CreateorOmniverse View, is composed of a collection of specificOmniverse Kit Extensions. Extensions can be leveraged by developers in building their own workflows for faster time to development, with more regularly being created by NVIDIA or third parties.
Omniverse CodeOmniverse Code is the integrated development environment for developers and power users to easily build their Omniverse extensions, apps, microservices or connectors. The Omniverse Code app provides the foundational tools and templates any developer needs in order to easily expose the powerful capabilities of Omniverse Kit SDK.
NVIDIA DRIVE SimNVIDIA DRIVE Simis a simulation platform designed for end-to-end simulation of autonomous vehicles. DRIVE Sim has been architected on the Omniverse platform to run large-scale, physically accurate, multi-sensor simulations in rich 3D environments--and all in real time. Simulation can be used for validating AV functions or using theOmniverse Replicatorfor DRIVE Sim built to generate synthetic data for training AI perception networks. Omniverse’s native extensibility also means DRIVE Sim is open to customization from a wide range of industry ecosystem partners.
NVIDIA Isaac SimNVIDIA Isaac Simis a scalable robotics simulation application and synthetic data generation tool that powers photorealistic, physically accurate virtual environments to develop, test, and manage AI-based robots. The robotics application, built entirely on Omniverse, can be customized to support new sensors, bridges to different robotics frameworks, application-specific domain randomization, and more. Its powerful synthetic data generation capabilities are built on theOmniverse Replicatorsynthetic data-generation engine.
Omniverse ConnectorsOmniverse Connect librariesare distributed as plugins (or “Connectors”) that enable client applications to connect to Nucleus and to publish and subscribe to individual assets and full worlds. Developers can build their own Connectors using theOmniverse Connect SDK, available for free in the Omniverse Launcher.
Omniverse MicroservicesServices in Omniverse can be part of an Extension, use an Extension, or be a simple script executed by Omniverse Kit. Developers can easily build tools to automate repetitive tasks for themselves, or their user base, from rendering workflows, creating turntables, generating thumbnails, synthetic data generation, and more.
Omniverse FarmOmniverse Farm is the system layer that allows users to orchestrate multiple computing resources to execute batch and interactive tasks. It is both infrastructure agnostic—meaning it can work across typical workstations, VMs, bare-metal servers, or advanced cloud scheduling platforms such as Kubernetes—and task agnostic, able to orchestrate and distribute tasks from rendering, streaming, file conversion, synthetic data generation, to simulation.
Developers can build tools for their users, or themselves, to leverage Farm in batch mode for ad hoc tasks such as rendering or file conversion; or in interactive mode for persistent tasks that are executed by an arbitrary machine, or cluster of machines, that have been allocated for the specific use.
Batch RenderingThe Omniverse platform also enables rendering as a microservice. Enabled by Omniverse Farm, users and teams can submit batch render tasks across multiple machines to accelerate render times. NVIDIA’s creative and engineering teams leverage rendering via Omniverse Farm to produce the GTC keynote demos from 2021 which included over 60,000 frames submitted for rendering across almost 800 compute resources - from workstation, to on-premises, and even in the cloud.
Batch Synthetic Data GenerationGenerating datasets from realistic simulations is a powerful tool for training ML algorithms. Built-in capabilities include synthetic data visualization and recording, broad synthetic sensor support, and powerful domain randomization techniques. NVIDIA teams have built their own microservices to execute batch synthetic data generation tasks via Omniverse Farm to power robotics andautonomous vehicle trainingand validation.
DeepSearchDeepSearchis a set of services and clients that allow users to tag their 3D models automatically using AI, add additional tags manually, and search through their entire content with tags. The system relies on two services that are designed to run on a Kubernetes cluster:Inference Service, a classification of existing assets using a pre-trained Deep Learning (DL) mode, andSearch Service, the indexing of assets in Omniverse and efficient retrieval of objects given an input tag.
Omniverse Avatar PlatformOmniverse Avatar is a technology platform to develop interactive AI avatars, connecting NVIDIA’s core AI technologies -NVIDIA Rivafor speech AI,NVIDIA Metropolisfor computer vision,NVIDIA NeMoMegatron for natural language understanding, andNVIDIA Merlinrecommendation engines. These life-like video avatars respond to speech and facial cues, understand multiple languages, and are able to make smart recommendations.
Omniverse Avatar platform is currently under development.
Sign up to be notified.
Developer EcosystemDeveloper License and PricingIt is free to develop Omniverse Kit SDK-based Extensions, Apps, and Microservices, or Omniverse Connect SDK-based Connectors on the Omniverse Platform.
Developers can sell their own Apps, Extensions, Microservices, or Connectors on their own, or be featured in the Omniverse Exchange. Developers are not able to distribute any NVIDIA-developed Omniverse Apps, Extensions, or Microservices, nor Omniverse Nucleus or Omniverse Kit.
End-users of the Omniverse-based Extension, App, Microservice, or Connector will need either anOmniverselicense or anOmniverse Enterpriselicense.
Latest Omniverse NewsUpcoming Webinar: How Synthetic Data is Supercharging Vision AI DevelopmentJoin this webinar from Metropolis on May 18 or 19 to learn how synthetic data can transform your AI development efforts, including using the NVIDIA Omniverse Replicator.
Building Scientifically Accurate Digital Twins Using Modulus with Omniverse and AIThe latest release features Omniverse integration for interactive visualization, new AI architectures to accelerate the scientific simulations using data, and more.
Shaping the Future of Graphics with NVIDIA Technologies in Unreal Engine 5With the launch of Unreal Engine 5, NVIDIA announces support with key RTX technologies for developers to propel their games and experiences to the next level.
Latest Releases and Resources: NVIDIA GTC 2022This GTC focused roundup features updates to the HPC SDK, cuQuantum SDK, Nsight Graphics and Systems 2022.2, CUDA 11.6, Update 1, cuNumeric, and Warp.
Become Part of Our CommunityAccess TutorialsTake advantage of hundreds of freetutorials,sessions, or our beginner’s training toget started with USD.
Become an OmnivoreJoin our community! Attend our weekly live streams onTwitchand connect with us onDiscordand our forums.
Get Technical SupportHaving trouble? Post your questions in theforumsfor quick guidance from Omniverse experts, or refer to the platformdocumentation.
Live Training SessionsWant to dive deeper into NVIDIA Omniverse? Attend alive trainingwith a certified instructor from FMC.
Connect with us:Stay up-to-date on the latest NVIDIA Omniverse news
