old id = 3140
AI In Chess: The Evolution of Artificial Intelligence In Chess Engines | by Bharath K | Towards Data Science
2021
https://towardsdatascience.com/ai-in-chess-the-evolution-of-artificial-intelligence-in-chess-engines-a3a9e230ed50

Towards Data ScienceApr 2, 2021SaveAI In Chess: The Evolution of Artificial Intelligence In Chess EnginesUncovering the advancements in artificial intelligence, neural networks, and deep learning leading to the rapid development of chess engines. What does the future holds for these upcoming progressions?Chess is a fabulous game!Chess is a two-player strategy board game played on a checkered board with 64 squares arranged in an 8×8 square grid. Played by millions of people worldwide, chess is believed to be derived from the Indian game chaturanga sometime before the 7th century.
Chess has gained tremendous popularity, and it is leading to a revolutionary trend due to more people getting involved with chess at the time of this global pandemic. So, there is no better time to analyze the role of artificial intelligence in improving the quality of chess.
Artificial Intelligence is a revolution in itself with the numerous feats of accomplishments that it has been able to achieve. The use of AI in the real world and real-life scenarios is ample. They have a wide array of use cases to improve the quality of life in general. Another wonderful use of Artificial Intelligence is in the sport of Chess.
Before we dwell into understanding the significance of AI in Chess, check out the following article that answers the question of some of the most popular uses of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science that we utilize in our daily lives.
10 Awesome Real-World Applications Of Data Science And AIUnderstanding and analyzing the day to day use of AI and Data Science In the real world!towardsdatascience.comLet us visit some of the sections of this article that will give us a brief introduction to the history of Artificial Intelligence in Chess. Then, we will proceed to learn about the Modern Evolution Of Chess Engines and the Influence of AI in the Universe Of Chess. Finally, we will conclude with why every developer should try to implement the programming of a similar chess engine. Without further ado, let us get started.
Brief Introduction To History of AI and Chess:In 1951, Alan Turing was the first to publish a program, developed on paper, that was capable of playing a full game of chess. Consistent developments were continued to be made in the upcoming years. New chess games and chess engines were developed during this time period. However, success on a higher level was yet to be achieved for these AI chess engines. Possibly, due to the lack of effective resources and tools.
In the 1980s, a strong claim was made by the then world champion Garry Kasparov that AI chess engines could never reach a point where they could defeat top-level grandmasters. His statement would remain true for a few years where he successfully defended his throne in 1996 against IBM’s Deep Blue in a match over six games with 4:2. In their previous clash in 1989, he had also defeated Deep Blue’s predecessor, IBM’s computer Deep Thought.
A year after losing to the World Champion, Deep Blue came back to beat the world champion. Kasparov was defeated by Deep Blue in the rematch with 2.5:3.5. Although there is a small controversy regarding the authority of this win, it is mostly regarded in the favor of the chess engine. Kasparov in one of his recent interviews (check it out in the reference) also agreed to this point that he was indeed beat fair and square.
Chess engines have come a long way from the era of the 1950s to the current generation of chess games. Let us analyze the modern evolution of chess engines in the next section of this article to gain a more clear picture of the accomplishments made by AI in chess.
Modern Evolution Of Chess Engines:The Artificial Intelligence algorithms developed for human play utilize many different kinds of principles. While it is complex to discuss what each engine uses for its functionality and working, we know that a few popular engines like Alpha zero make use of neural networks, deep learning, and neural net-like automation. Leela Chess Zero utilizes an open-source implementation of AlphaZero, which learns chess through self-play games and deep reinforcement learning.
Nowadays, modern chess engines are so well-developed that they will not drop a single game to human players. Even the current reigning, defending world champion failed to beat the modern best chess engine even once in a span of 100 games. The world champion has a FIDE rating of over 2800 across all formats. The contest usually takes place in a classical time format. The match was against Stockfish 9.
It has a rating of 3438 (the engine ratings are not FIDE ratings, but the player pool for engines is much stronger than for humans, so theoretically a FIDE rating for Stockfish 9 would be even higher). Check out the reference section for more details on this topic.
The results of the two modern clashes of chess engines are as follows as referenced Wikipedia.
These modern results with the help of chess engines and neural networks and deep learning-based chess networks taking over the chess world by storm is a huge sign of the potential of greater and enormous possibilities. Let us dwell a bit more into the potential influence of Artificial Intelligence in the Universe of Chess.
Influence of AI in the Universe Of Chess:Artificial Intelligence has influenced the way in which chess games are played at the top level. Most of the Grandmasters and Super Grandmasters (Rated at a FIDE above 2700) utilize these modern Artificial Intelligence chess engines to analyze their games as well as the games of their competitors. There is a complete turnaround in the way in which chess games are now played.
The basic opening theories and other analytical concepts are thoroughly analyzed. In classical formats of chess, you will usually see these high-level players make about 10–15 of the first moves from previously analyzed games or the top engine recommendations.
The quality of the top-level games has also drastically improved because of the help of these engines. It is almost impossible to rate or compete a modern player against a legendary player of the older decades due to the fact of enormous improvement with the help of these chess engines.
While some may oppose that these chess engines have impacted the game of chess in a negative manner because it is more about theory rather than actual practice and play as compared to the older ages. Others argue that this influence of AI on chess is an overall drastic improvement and further advancements are yet to be made for challenging the modern players.
And ultimately making them much better with both opening theory and other tricks to pack up their sleeves. There is still room for human error. These errors can be exploited by players to gain advantages and have interesting games of attacking chess.
Try to Implement your own Chess Engine:We have learned about the brief history, the fabulous stories, and the ultimate influence that Artificial Intelligence has had on the Chess world. But, I want the main objective and takeaway from this article to try to implement your own chess engine from scratch.
No matter what level of programming you are involved with, you will have a great time exploring the numerous aspects of building your chess engine. I firmly believe that programmers and developers should try to develop a game with Python and Artificial Intelligence. Check out the article below that provides five reasons why everyone develops a game for fun during their learning process.
5 Reasons Why You Should Develop A Game With Python And AI!The 5 Reasons why learning to create a game is highly beneficial for improving your productivity with Python…towardsdatascience.comIf you are a beginner-level programmer, then you can try to explore the artistic features while implementing the structure of the board and the pieces. You will learn the features of functions and classes to implement the structure of the board as well as place the pieces in their respective positions. You can experiment with the two colors of the chessboard and the chess pieces. Finally, you will gain an overall cool graphical structure that you would have designed from scratch using your coding skills.
If you are more of an intermediate-level AI developer or programmer, you can start implementing the functionalities of the pieces and their respective movements. Each piece has its own representation and notation for the particular motion. You need to implement these positions and also compute the capturing of each of these pieces. All this work does not have to be perfect. A brief picture showing your understanding skills should do the job.
Finally, for advanced-level programmers and AI developers, you can study a bunch of games and chess engines that are developed in recent years. Using these data and datasets available, you can construct deep learning neural networks for your chess engine. The chess engine can learn from the numerous games played since the 1800s. Chess has a humungous dataset allowing developers to implement some decent quality chess engines from scratch by themselves.
Conclusion:Artificial Intelligence is a revolutionary phenomenon, and it has undoubtedly changed the landscape of chess, unlike many other platforms that are lucky to be embraced by AI. The impact of Artificial Intelligence on chess can be argued with both pros and cons, with spectrums having valid points.
However, it is undeniable that the influence, the hype, and the excitement generated by AI are magnificent. In the future, Artificial Intelligence has great potential in the field of chess. The modern developments and advancements in chess engines are increasing rapidly. We can have much greater feats of accomplishments in the modern world of chess.
I am excited to see where these improvements reach. I also hope all of you will try to implement a chessboard or a chess engine of your own as a fun project!I would highly recommend checking out the references section of this article.
The references used while writing this article contain valuable information. They are a great source of content and knowledge if you are interested in learning more about this particular topic. Please do check them out whenever you have time!If you have any queries related to the various points stated in this article, then feel free to let me know in the comments below. I will try to get back to you with a response as soon as possible.
Check out some of my other articles that you might enjoy reading!7 Tips To Crack Data Science And Machine Learning Interviews!7 Detailed Tips To Help You Perform Better In Data Science And Machine Learning Interviewstowardsdatascience.com8 Best Visualizations To Consider For Your Data Science Projects!Analyzing the 8 best visualization techniques in Exploratory Data Analysis for Data Science projects.
towardsdatascience.com15 Tips To Be More Successful In Data Science!15 factors every Data Science enthusiast must work on to have more success as a Data Scientisttowardsdatascience.comMachine Learning 101: Master MLLearn all the essential and core concepts of Machine Learning required by Beginners to master the fieldtowardsdatascience.com5 Unique Use Cases Of AI That Might Surprise YouFind out five unique applications of Artificial Intelligence in the real world that is fascinatingtowardsdatascience.comThank you all for sticking on till the end. I hope all of you enjoyed reading the article. Wish you all a wonderful day!References:------More from Towards Data ScienceYour home for data science. A Medium publication sharing concepts, ideas and codes.
Recommended from MediumDekhainArtificial Intelligence in Plain EnglishSarad Bade ShresthainMLearning.aiDario RadečićinTowards Data ScienceTirth PatelSimonaBas VlaminginPicnic EngineeringDavid MartinsinTowards Data ScienceAnshuk Pal ChaudhuriinNightingaleAboutHelpTermsPrivacyGet the Medium appBharath K1.2K FollowersLove to explore and learn new concepts. Extremely interested in AI, deep learning, robots, and the universe. LinkedIn —www.linkedin.com/in/bharath-k-421090194More from MediumMagdalena KonkiewiczinTowards Data ScienceBharath KinTowards Data ScienceNico Van den HooffinTowards Data ScienceAndreas StöcklinTowards Data ScienceHelpStatusWritersBlogCareersPrivacyTermsAboutKnowable
