old id = 3432
Intel Is Building the World's Most Powerful Supercomputer
2021
https://singularityhub.com/2019/03/25/intel-is-building-the-worlds-most-powerful-supercomputer

Intel Is Building the World’s Most Powerful SupercomputerA supercomputer capable of a quintillion operations a second will go online in 2021 after the US government handed Intel and supercomputer manufacturerCraya contractto build anexascale computercalled Aurora. This machine is being built from the bottom up torun AIat unprecedented scales.
Today’s most powerful supercomputers measure their performance in petaflops—one petaflop is a quadrillion operations per second—but theUS,China, and Japan are all racing to be the first to reach the next major milestone of an exaflop early next decade.
That will be a huge leap above current capabilities. The world’s current fastest supercomputer, calledSummit, only came online last June, and clocked a top speed of 143.5 petaflops in November. Aurora would be looking for a 7x boost in just a few years.
The news didn’t exactly come out of left field, though. The project has been discussed for some time, but this can be seen as the equivalent of a ground breaking ceremony after the Department of Energy formally announced the plans. The new machine will cost $500 million and will be housed at the DOE’s Argonne National Laboratory near Chicago.
The announcement also didn’t reveal too many details about how the feat would be achieved. In a press releaseIntel saidthe machine will be powered by a future generation of its Xeon processors, a future generation of its Optane memory chips, and its yet-to-be-released XeGPUs. But the chipmaker is playing its cards close to its chest when it comes to the exact design and configuration of these future chips.
For its part, Cray will be housing Intel’s chips in its next-generation Shasta supercomputer system, which will include its Slingshot interconnect—the ultra-fast optical cables designed to shuttle data around the system.
This is actually Intel’s second crack at building a system named Aurora. It was originally due to build a 180-petaflop system using its now-scrapped Knight’s Hill family of processors that would have gone live last year.
After the project was refocused on the exascale system, it appears they’ve taken a cue from more recent supercomputers like Summit and Sierra that use a hybrid CPU-GPU approach,notes Nicole Hemsoth inNext Platform. But rather than relying on GPUs from external specialists like Nvidia or AMD, it appears Intel is determined to build one themselves.
That’s perhaps indicative of thegrowing convergence of high-performance computing and AI, which typically run far more efficiently on GPUs than CPUs, a trend Intel is probably keen not to get left behind by.
In a press briefing before the announcement, Argonne’s Rick Stevens, who is overseeing the project,saidAurora is being designed specifically to enable it to run massive deep learning models, with more than 100 AI applications already under development at various national laboratories.
Delivering such a dramatic boost in performance will be a colossal research and development effort, though. Experts agree that the technology roadmap is fairly well laid-out, but it will still pose many challenges, anddeveloping software for computers of this size and complexitycould be an even bigger task.
But Stevenstold reportersat the briefing that they were confident the necessary advances in both hardware and software would come through in time. “Exascale R&D has been going on for over a decade and the innovation curves on which these exascale platforms are being based are moving extremely rapidly,” he said.
Whether the US will be the first country to cross the exascale barrier is too hard to call at this stage. A super-computing expert intimately involved in China’s exascale effortsconceded toMIT Tech Reviewlast year that they may have to push back their initial goal of unveiling a machine by the end of 2020 as they weigh the benefits of using home-grown chips or ones they’ve licensed from western companies.
Japan is also targeting a 2021 launch for itspost-K computer, which will use ARM CPUs and is heavily focused on rapid data movement rather than raw FLOPs. Its designers believe that focus will help it run applications faster than its competitors.
It looks like theexascale raceis going to be a photo finish.
Image Credit:Pressmaster/Shutterstock.comFollow Edd:LatestThis Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through May 21)Volvo and DHL Are Partnering on Hub-to-Hub Autonomous TruckingHow a Volcanic Bombardment in Ancient Australia Led to the World’s Greatest Climate CatastropheRELATEDThis Portable Wind Turbine Is the Size of a Water Bottle and Charges Devices in Under an HourNanomagnetic Computing Could Drastically Cut AI’s Energy UseThe Ideal Qubit? Future Quantum Computers Could Crunch Data With Single Electrons on Neon IceHow the Extinction of Ice Age Mammals May Have Forced Us to Invent CivilizationGet the latest news from Singularity Hub!Singularity University, Singularity Hub, Singularity Summit, SU Labs, Singularity Labs, Exponential Medicine, Exponential Finance and all associated logos and design elements are trademarks and/or service marks of Singularity Education Group.
© 2022 Singularity Education Group. All Rights Reserved.
Singularity University is not a degree granting institution.
