old id = 3807
Champion All Voices: Diversity & Inclusion Report 2021
2021
https://di.report.condenast.com

Diversity & Inclusion Report 2021Champion All VoicesA letter from RogerOur second annual Diversity and Inclusion Report reflects ourCondé Codewith the theme, "Champion All Voices." Simple and to the point, we say this because far too many of our employees experience systemic and structural racism in their everyday lives that diminishes, sometimes even erasing, vital perspectives and contributions. I want Condé Nast to be the antidote. It’s our stated mission to seek out perspectives and ideas from everywhere and to be inclusive,and this report is just one way we are holding ourselves accountable.
Helping us lead these efforts is Chief Diversity and Inclusion Officer, Yashica Olden. Yashica and her team have developed a breadth of innovative programs and community partnerships to change how we operate, from strengthening our hiring practices and expanding our employee support programs, to introducing new tools for us to evaluate the inclusivity of our content.
In gathering our 2021 data, I’m grateful to see that our efforts have resulted in some positive outcomes. Across our U.S. workforce, 41% of all new hires identify as people of color, increasing our total population by 4%. We continue to have one of the largest female workforces (65%) across the media landscape and our executive leadership team is one of the most diverse with 70% female, 30% LGBTQ+ and 30% people of color representation. An area of focus for us is on the next levels of senior leadership where we are committed to growing our diversity after seeing our numbers remain flat year over year.
Culture is not static and neither is our approach to diversity, equity and inclusion. The work that we’re sharing with you is one part of an expansive and ever-evolving strategy designed to ensure that we, as an organization, are constantly striving to create an environment where our teams feel comfortable bringing their authentic selves to work every day. When we bring our own truth to our work, our audiences see themselves reflected in culture, society and the world in which they live.
Roger LynchChief Executive OfficerA letter from YashicaCondé Nast holds a unique and powerful position as a global portfolio of renowned brands with some of the most influential journalists and talented culture creators on the planet. I am honored to help lead Condé Nast in this important and meaningful work. Our second Diversity & Inclusion Report, “Champion All Voices,” outlines our commitment to increase diverse representation within our workforce, create inclusive content and fight social and racial injustice. When I joined the organization at the end of 2020, I felt inspired by what we could achieve.
As a company, we started with a commitment from our senior leaders, who acknowledge that accountability and transparency are critical components to delivering actionable, sustainable change. During the past 18 months, we have appointed incredible editorial leaders around the world who are leading the charge in championing the voices of all within their spheres of influence.
Our editorial teams are bold, inspirational and fearless storytellers who share diverse, provocative, highly nuanced, intersectional and multi-dimensional stories. Their work challenges us all to question the status quo and to view the world through a more inclusive lens. I am also excited to highlight the initiatives we have created to give access and opportunities to emerging diverse talent across our business.
Additionally, we are making important investments in the human resources tools, processes and practices that create transparency, fairness and equity for all Condé Nast employees around the world. Diversity practices are being integrated into all our broader people protocols – particularly compensation, recruiting, promotion, succession planning and performance. We are learning every day about how to improve. We are also creating an inclusive culture where belonging is imperative, where everyone is treated with respect and where employees can grow and thrive.
Since publishing our first report, we learned so much about the tools and programs we implemented so that we can continue to evolve and be better. For example, in 2020 we committed to ensure that 50% of candidates on hiring slates were from underrepresented groups. However, as we rely solely on candidates to voluntarily share their diversity information, we learned it is not always possible to accurately measure the diversity of our candidate slates. Nonetheless, our stated commitments and goals in this area drove our steady progress in hiring and overall representation of people of color last year. Now, going forward, we are even more invested in improving our talent sourcing pipeline and networks, including partnering with organizations that help connect us to diverse talent to make sure our hiring slates are as diverse as possible.
While we are pleased with the strides we’re making, there is still so much to be done. Creating a diverse, equitable and inclusive culture is an ongoing collective effort. We know that impactful, sustainable change takes long-term commitment, strategic action, and constant self-evaluation. I am optimistic that this work will continue to champion all voices.
Yashica OldenGlobal Chief Diversity & Inclusion OfficerOur CommitmentsWe are making progress toward the diversity and inclusion commitments that we shared in 2020. We know that there is no end to this critical work and we hold ourselves accountable to actionable, purpose-driven goals. Our D&I commitments were created in a concerted effort to exact change in our industry, starting within. We outlined these priorities as they are the building blocks to lasting impact.
Employee DiversityWe are committed to seeing our new hires' ethnic and racial diversity increase each year; therefore, recruitment and retention efforts continue to be a primary focus.
We continue to build a robust pipeline of diverse candidates, ensuring jobs are posted publicly, both internally and externally, and that our recruitment capabilities are well-resourced.
We committed to relaunch the U.S. internship program prioritizing participation among young people from a wide range of backgrounds and schools, including community programs and schools outside of traditional four-year institutions. We are also in the process of collecting information from all our markets on their career development programs.
As we committed in 2020, we are working to ensure that 50% of candidates on hiring slates are from these essential backgrounds every year.
As we assess our diversity and inclusion policies and processes to determine where we need to focus our efforts, we have asked U.S. employees to update and provide diversity data about themselves voluntarily. We plan to use this data to strengthen our recruitment, progression and retention efforts around the globe.
We acknowledge and will continue to support the unique strengths and talents of having a majority-female workforce. We are now measuring employees who identify as gender non-binary or choose not to identify their gender.
Creating fair and consistent compensation systems and processes is our priority. To best capture the comprehensive way we are looking at our compensation, as well as provide an update to the commitments we’ve made to improve our systems, we are building a Compensation Guide in the U.S. that will detail our new systems including job architecture which includes job leveling, ongoing pay equity analysis, ongoing peer-to-peer analysis and more.
LeadershipWe are committed to elevating and promoting diverse and underrepresented employees while helping to grow their careers.
We will launch a global succession planning process as a way to identify high-potential employees to ensure these leaders have individual career growth plans tailored to their skills, talents and career goals.
ContentWe are committed to identifying, creating and promoting content that reflects the topics and stories most important to all communities.
We are committed to beginning new practices to support diversity among our freelancers and contributors, including photographers.
In 2022, Condé Nast will launch Lookbook, an internal platform to promote the work of emerging, diverse, talented employees.
Training and BenefitsBy 2021, 100% of our global employees have undergone mandatory unconscious bias and anti-racism training.
We continue to review our global holiday and benefits practices to ensure we are addressing all market-specific needs.
We launched early talent development programs aimed at students including, Creative Labs partnering with the Education Alliance charity in New York, the Vogue Business Writing Competition in the UK and U.S. and the Condé Nast College in the UK.
Next year, we will actively collect diversity data and metrics using the Global Diversity and Engagement Survey with diversity categories by the market; we will also capture relevant data daily using Workday to implement it across the organization.
Our ProgressTo chart our future, we identified tangible goals that will hold us accountable as we continue to create an equitable and inclusive approach to recruitment, retention and talent development. We are building a pipeline of diverse employees, celebrating our people, creating space for inclusive content and talent and empowering our workforce. Our vision for diversity within Condé Nast comes to life through our Diversity & Inclusion Pillars that include Culture, Career, Content, Community and Commercial.
CultureCreate an inclusive workplace where everyone can reach their full potentialAnti-Racism Training:In 2021, we developed a mandatory diversity, unconscious bias and anti-racism training offering that was completed by 100% of our eligible global workforce. And more than 90% of new hires have completed the training since December 2020.
Diversity Training Programs:Other diversity training programs include a daily D&I module called Crescendo, accessible to US employees over Slack. In addition, we invested in a new learning management system (LMS) that contains comprehensive D&I learning programs. Condé Nast Germany delivered a series of training programs focused on anti-racism, anti-semitism, anti-trans and other cultural initiatives for the local team. In addition, the team developed a diversity terminology guide for the editorial teams. Condé Nast Italy launched mandatory D&I training for the leadership team focusing on local culture, legislation, diversity demographics and terminology.
Cultural Awareness:We continued our Condé Conversations, a speaker series for our teams worldwide to hear from thought leaders on the key issues shaping our culture to provoke new ways of thinking and spark discussions about topics Condé Nast brands cover. A few topics covered in 2021 included investingin Black owned businesses, the impact of COVID on Black and minority communities, LGBTQ+ Parenting, Stop Asian Hate, the Matter of Black Lives, understanding gender identity and celebrating Hispanic/LatinX women entrepreneurs. These events attracted more than 3,000 global attendees.
Building Community:Employee Resource Groups (ERGs) are employee-led networks of volunteers who share common cultures, identities and interests that represent the many diverse voices and perspectives at Condé Nast. In 2021, we expanded the ERGs globally to our markets beyond the U.S.
Communications:We are committed to communicating to employees regularly about our global D&I efforts. In 2021, our diversity was regularly featured during global Town Hall meetings, safe room discussions, recruiting outreach events, team meetings and brand-specific D&I committees. We also created a D&I microsite on the intranet, a fact sheet, a community newsletter and an annual report.
CareerRecruit, develop and retain extraordinary talent to fuel our growthPay Equity:We built a comprehensive Guide to Compensation focused on ongoing pay equity analysis, implementing new systems, including job architecture, job leveling, and regular peer-to-peer analysis. We completed the first pay review in the U.S. in 2021 with a plan to expand to global markets in the coming years.
Policies & Benefits:We continue to audit all employee policies and benefits to ensure they are inclusive. We expanded the Employee Assistance Program globally to provide employees with advice and support for mental health, finances, legal support and family concerns.
Hiring:Our commitment to 50% diverse hiring slates was implemented in the U.S. and resulted in great outcomes, including an increase in diverse hires for people of color and women in 2021, specifically 11% of new hires globally were women hired in the technology and data teams. Working with our hiring managers and talent acquisition teams, we created targeted recruiting campaigns to attract diverse talent, posted all roles externally and implemented bias training for hiring teams. For instance, in India we launched a very successful campaign to attract women engineers.
Recruiting Partners:We partnered with professional associations and diversity recruiting organizations that give us access to talent and raise our profile among diverse communities.
Onboarding:We provided American Sign Language (ASL) interpretation services for a new employee who is deaf. It was an important tool to ensure an easier onboarding into our Global Product and Technology team.
Career Development:A newly launched global career development strategy included a goal-setting and performance review process, which helped ensure all employees received manager feedback, reduced bias and opened a dialogue for career development. For the first time in 2021, we collected information from our markets about their pipeline and career development programs.
Mentoring:A new global mentor program debuted with over 150 mentor/mentee pairs and included a reverse mentoring initiative for members of the Executive Leadership Team.
Leadership Development:Comprehensive leadership development and coaching were offered to employees across all levels and markets.
Promotion & Succession:A succession planning and talent mapping process was launched to identify a diverse talent pipeline for every leadership role, and is now a part of the organization's annual talent evaluation process.
Mental Health & Wellbeing:In the midst of the global pandemic, we identified stress as a major issue facing our employees. So we provided a series of counselor-led workshops and resources for both employees and managers on racism and managing racial trauma, resilience, managing stress, managing childcare and recovering after a crisis. Additional programming included virtual exercise classes and meditation.
Diversity Data Collection:We expanded our diversity data categories in the U.S. HR system to include more aspects of diversity in particular sexual orientation, disability and veterans. We are using Workday in the U.S. to capture most diversity data, and we will continue to expand to our international markets as possible in the future. We actively use this data to strengthen our recruitment, progression, and retention efforts.
Inclusion Index:As a part of our annual global employee engagement survey, we created an Inclusion Index score as one way to help measure how engaged our employees feel about our diversity and inclusion efforts. We collected global diversity data and are using the data to track progress and to make improvements toward developing an inclusive culture.
ContentCreate award-winning inclusive content globallyContent Audit:Condé Nast Entertainment and the Audience Development teams collaborated to find, examine and confront biases within our content. Articles and videos are being audited for diversity and inclusivity to learn, understand, and improve the quality and quantity of our representation of people of color, gender, sexual orientation, size, disability, and other categories where audiences have been historically underrepresented. As part of this work, we will now partner with each brand to review findings, set goals and measure success that will feed into CNE’s network-wide inclusion standards.
Production:Condé Nast Entertainment (CNE) created a new development process and production workflows, including hosting a pilot program workshop to discuss the fundamentals of inclusive storytelling.
Creative Talent Lookbook:The Lookbook platform was launched internally as a talent directory to help source emerging diverse production talent around the globe.
Content Advisory Board:An internal team of leaders across all brands was introduced to ensure diversity and inclusion in all content across print and digital.
Content Sensitivity Review:An internal team of sensitivity readers was hired to review the final content of Glamour Women of the Year’s 30th Anniversary book — this team helped shape the language and final structure of the book with the goal of making it an inclusive reading experience.
Representation:In September 2020, Vogue U.S. announced a commitment to taking the 15% Pledge to increase the representation of Black contributors and freelance talent. In 2021, we exceeded the pledge representation. All our other brands are collaborating with content leaders and teams to develop new practices to support diversity among our freelancers and contributors, including photographers, make-up artists, hairstylists, and lighting specialists.
Diversity Terminology Guides:The country content teams created their own diversity terminology guidance for the editorial teams in their local languages.
CommercialDevelop strong partnerships to drive growthEmerging Audiences, CNX:In 2020, Commercial Revenue launched the Emerging Audiences team within CNX to develop creative positioning that allows clients to authentically connect diverse and growth consumers across the Condé Nast brand portfolio. This team has been instrumental in partnering with sales, research and other internal stakeholders to curate opportunities for engagement with key consumers, whose evolving spending powers continue to impact our culture.
Partnerships & Engagement:The Commercial Revenue team built partnerships with organizations in ​an expanded effort to increase diversity in our hiring pipeline,​ retain diverse talent​, ​and strengthen our ties to historically underrepresented communities​. Organizations included #HIREBLACK, Sistas-In-Sales, ColorComm and MAIP.
Affirmative Action:In compliance with our role as a federal contractor, we created an Affirmative Action Plan to ensure we provide fairness in hiring, employment and advancement processes.
CommunityProvide external support for our global diversity commitments in local communitiesPro Bono Advertising:We continue to support organizations focused on combating racial injustice and inequality with $1.4 million in pro bono advertising on our platforms and in print. This powerful action helped increase the public’s exposure to these great non-profit organizations and help them deliver their mission. As a part of the #stopasianhate campaign, we supported Gold House, Act to Change, the Asian American Foundation, the Ad Council and ESA Scotland. Other charities include the NAACP and Color of Change. In addition, through our partnership with the United Nations supporting the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), we provided pro bono advertising for UNICEF and UN Women.
Other Charitable Support and Volunteering:Our Legal team provides pro bono legal advice to artists and cultural organizations through the Volunteer Lawyers for the Arts in New York. In addition, we made donations to Healthy Humor, Hispanic Federation, World Central Kitchen and Barbara Sinatra Children’s Center, to name a few.
9/11 Day:To mark the 20th anniversary of 9/11, Condé Nast partnered with 9/11 Day for a U.S.-wide volunteer effort packaging meals for people in need. Employees in New York, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Washington D.C. and Chicago came together for the non-profit organization's National Day of Service.
Employee Donation Matching:$95,000 was donated to Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund (AALDEF) in support of the #stopasianhate campaign. Condé Nast also matched employee donations to the International Committee of the Red Cross for the COVID-19 Relief Effort in India.
Our StoriesWe strive to create inspiring and engaging content, experiences and products that are as diverse as the audiences we serve.
Met Gala 2021:"In America: A Lexicon of Fashion"The 2021 Met Gala "In America: A Lexicon of Fashion" celebrated diverse designers, producers and creatives.
Vanity Fair:Forging a New Asian Creative CultureVanity Fair reports on how Gold House is using the power of media and money to pave a path for the future of Asian culture and community.
GQ:Men of the YearGQ’s Men of the Year issue continues to drive the conversation about what masculinity means in 2021 by highlighting Gen Z rapper and musician Lil Nas X.
Wired:A People's History of Black TwitterWired published Jason Parham's "A People’s History of Black Twitter," a three-part feature told exclusively through Black voices.
Allure:The Melanin Edit"The Melanin Edit" from Allure is a platform which explores every facet of a melanin-rich life.
Glamour:Women of the Year AwardsThe vaccine pioneer protecting the world. The most powerful force in hip-hop. The TV detective campaigning for survivors in real life. The superheroes of democracy. The activists countering Asian American hate one meal at a time. And the poet who became the voice of a generation. Meet Glamour's Women of the Year 2021.
Vogue Germany:Veiled Identities & Unveiled StoriesVogue Germany published the "Veiled Identities & Unveiled Stories” project – a photo series illuminating the diverse identities of Muslim women.
The New Yorker:The Matter of Black LivesA collection of The New Yorker‘s groundbreaking writing on race in America, "The Matter of Black Lives" includes work by renowned writers such as James Baldwin, Toni Morrison, Ta-Nehisi Coates, Hilton Als, Zadie Smith, and more with a foreword by Jelani Cobb.
Show MoreCondé Nast Traveller:The World Made LocalCondé Nast Traveller launched its first global collaboration of all international editions – "The World Made Local." On Condé Nast Traveller India's cover, queer poet Joshua Muyiwa shared tips on making the most of your time in Bangalore.
Glamour U.K.
:The Hair IssueFor Glamour U.K.'s May digital issue, Jodie Turner-Smith fronted the brand's first-ever Hair Issue. In an interview, Turner-Smith discussed motherhood, representation and her own experiences of racism and texturism.
The New Yorker:Quiet No MoreASME’s 2021 Video Award went to The New Yorker for the documentary “Quiet No More” directed by Eleonore Hameline.
Vanity Fair Italy:#LaStradaGiustaIn May 2021, Vanity Fair Italy launched #LaStradaGiusta – a special issue celebrating the female talents who are writing the new social, cultural, political and economic geography of the country.
Teen Vogue:Maitreyi RamakrishnanFor Editor in Chief Versha Sharma's inagurual cover, Maitreyi Ramakrishnan appeared as the second person of South Asian heritage to appear on the cover of Teen Vogue. She spoke about carrying the weight of South Asian representation in television.
Photo Vogue Festival 2021:Reframing HistoryThe sixth edition of Photo Vogue, held in Milan, Italy, in November 2021, explored the projects that have reclaimed an alternative, different way of telling a tale.
Vogue:Celebrating Indigenous and Native American People and CulturesThe Vogue team covers Indigenous and Native American communities and cultures. Fashion and Style Writer, Christian Allaire, writes about Indigenous models, artists, designers, photographers and tattoo artists.
Pitchfork:2021 Music FestivalThe Pitchfork Music Festival in Chicago continued to pave the way for progressive and inclusive bookings in the music industry.
Condé Nast Conexión:De Moda - LatinX in FashionConexión, Condé Nast's Hispanic/LatinX employee resource group hosted a dynamic Condé Conversation employee event titled De Moda - LatinX in Fashion.
Bon Appétit:Honoring Restaurant Community LeadersThe 2021 Restaurant Issue "Heads of the Table" honors and profiles the people, organizations, and restaurants that made a difference in their communities during the pandemic.
Vogue China:Vogue China Wants to Put a New Face on Chinese FashionVogue China launched an open casting call to find the September issue's cover star.
them.
:5 Queer Photographers Reimagine the Family PortraitFive photographers from across the country reimagined the family portrait to celebrate the bonds we choose.
Wired:What Really Happened When Google Ousted Timnit GebruWired asks – Can Big Tech take criticism from within?Epicurious:A Dinner Party Menu Celebrating Black Culinary HistoryCultural preservationist Gabrielle E.W. Carter shares a few of her favorite recipes from culinary figures of the Black diaspora.
Glamour:She Makes Money Move‪s‬ PodcastThere's power, especially for young women, in talking about money.
Wired:Disability and Mobility in TechnologyWired consistently covers stories about the latest technology to provide accessibility to people with disabilities.
Self:Black Women and Breast Cancer GuideThis comprehensive coverage provides Black women a guide to understanding - and overcoming - a breast cancer diagnosis.
Condé Nast Traveler:Women Who Travel PodcastCondé Nast Traveler editors discuss the realities of traveling for women.
Vogue:Becoming Vogue FranceThe November 2021 issue debuted the newly named Vogue France, formerly Vogue Paris. The name change explores and redefines the cultural richness of France, advocates for both individuality and community and the power of diversity and inclusivity.
Vogue:PRIDE Month Logo ChangeOur People#WeAreCondeNastand we all have our own unique stories to tell.
Meera Pattni – Senior Vice President of Communications"You have to be comfortable with living in different worlds every day; one that is respected and listened to at all levels of the company, one that is deeply embedded in the changing media landscape, and the most important one: the real world."Sarah Burke – Editor-in-Chief, them"Our industry doesn't offer nearly enough opportunities for mentorship and journalistic training, especially for queer and trans people of color. One of my goals is to start a mentorship network for LGBTQ journalists that focuses on equipping young reporters with skills that are too often gate kept."Joris Hendrik — Senior Creative Social Producer, Vogue"Coming from a diverse background has allowed me to grow and become inclusive by default in everything that I do. Thanks to that I promote more authentic storytelling in my work."Sheree Liu – Senior Data Engineer"I joined the business in the middle of the pandemic, so I really appreciate small moments that make me feel more connected to the company."Myiah McCullough – Diversity & Inclusion Manager"One initiative that I am really proud to work on is the global expansion of our Employee Resource Groups (ERGs). When I started at Condé Nast, I joined the Women’s Network as co-chair and saw first-hand how important creating a space for employees to learn about different topics and having a support system in place is to building our culture."Ashton McGown - Production Finance Coordinator"While NOIR advocates for the advancement of Black voices within the company, we also have varied interests and identities that are reflective of the other group and their focus areas."Tai Garcia – Editorial Initiatives Program Manager"Condé Nast, and businesses like this one who are culture keepers and creators, need to be open to learning from diverse voices and young voices because they are the consumers and target audience: what they care about matters."Gustavo Medina – Engineer Manager, Editorial Applications"I think my heritage and cultural background have helped me to understand the importance of diversity in teams. I am privileged in the sense that I am in a position where I can help build diverse software development teams here at Condé Nast."María José Gonzálvez – Fashion Coordinator, Vogue Mexico & Latin America"I'm a proud Mexican, and I always try to show the world the beauty and diversity of our country through the clothes I wear, through the content we curate for the magazine that highlights our unique heritage, or through Instagram by posting snaps of our gorgeous cities, beaches or pueblos."Amanda Kung – Video Media Associate Director, Condé Nast Taiwan"Our two brand channels, Vogue and GQ, have pretty impressive market penetration and are poised to break through a combined 2M subscriber mark by the end of 2021. That will be an exciting milestone for us to reach in Taiwan, where our total population is just under 24 million!"Jorge Madrid – CNX Director, Condé Nast Spain"The new global structure and challenges of digital transformation that are happening at Condé Nast are both a stimulus and a change that we must know how to deal with, and I am very interested in transforming this into opportunities for my team to grow."Archana Thani - Managing Editor, Vogue India"There's been a rise in recognition of Indian talent globally and I'm really excited to champion their initiatives."Milly Tritton – Global Content Manager"It's so important to me that we are elevating great talent and are representative of the modern world in our content, how we connect with our consumers and within the company globally."Camille Darby - VP Brand Marketing, Lifestyle Division"We often think of race, ethnicity and gender when we talk about diversity, which are crucial and must obviously continue to be addressed, but diversity in age, in thought, in experience, in education are also critical."Millie Tran – VP of Content Strategy and Growth"I've thought a lot about the importance of authentic, local storytelling, but also universal themes that resonate in many places across cultures, and what it means to have a global network. We already operate in 31 markets and have a presence in multiple countries around the world and are now working to connect all of those pieces to work together. There is a lot of infrastructure and culture change you need to enable that and that’s what we’re working on."Erin Paterson - Strategy Manager, Email"A lot of times I'll start out writing by trying to make sense of something that feels important to me."Yuki Gobaru - Director, Commercial Products, Condé Nast Japan"I never thought I was a workaholic, but I realized I was! The pandemic has definitely forced me to look more closely at my work-life balance. It's okay to work from home if you find a way to separate work from family time."Heily Guzman - Agency Partner, Video"Being Hispanic, we're taught growing up that if you work hard and do your job well, you will be rewarded in due time. I learned the hard way that in Corporate America, hard work alone is not enough. You have to ask for/demand what you deserve."Alex Freudenberger - Senior Art Director, Condé Nast Germany"Step out of your bubble, be proactive, be critical, embrace who you are and look for your tribe. And when you find it, don't be shy."Salvador Abarca Arriaga - Head of Video, CNÉ Mexico & Latin America"I like to think about my job from a philosophical perspective: I'm someone who lives to make ideas come true by creating tools and implementing systems that manage creativity by giving it direction."Hardip Gill - Service Desk Manager"It's all about helping colleagues, ensuring everyone has the tech they need, enabling them to work effectively and get the best out of their day. I love building relationships and working with colleagues from all different teams and just generally helping people."Meera Pattni – Senior Vice President of Communications"You have to be comfortable with living in different worlds every day; one that is respected and listened to at all levels of the company, one that is deeply embedded in the changing media landscape, and the most important one: the real world."Sarah Burke – Editor-in-Chief, them"Our industry doesn't offer nearly enough opportunities for mentorship and journalistic training, especially for queer and trans people of color. One of my goals is to start a mentorship network for LGBTQ journalists that focuses on equipping young reporters with skills that are too often gate kept."Joris Hendrik — Senior Creative Social Producer, Vogue"Coming from a diverse background has allowed me to grow and become inclusive by default in everything that I do. Thanks to that I promote more authentic storytelling in my work."Sheree Liu – Senior Data Engineer"I joined the business in the middle of the pandemic, so I really appreciate small moments that make me feel more connected to the company."Myiah McCullough – Diversity & Inclusion Manager"One initiative that I am really proud to work on is the global expansion of our Employee Resource Groups (ERGs). When I started at Condé Nast, I joined the Women’s Network as co-chair and saw first-hand how important creating a space for employees to learn about different topics and having a support system in place is to building our culture."Ashton McGown - Production Finance Coordinator"While NOIR advocates for the advancement of Black voices within the company, we also have varied interests and identities that are reflective of the other group and their focus areas."Tai Garcia – Editorial Initiatives Program Manager"Condé Nast, and businesses like this one who are culture keepers and creators, need to be open to learning from diverse voices and young voices because they are the consumers and target audience: what they care about matters."Gustavo Medina – Engineer Manager, Editorial Applications"I think my heritage and cultural background have helped me to understand the importance of diversity in teams. I am privileged in the sense that I am in a position where I can help build diverse software development teams here at Condé Nast."María José Gonzálvez – Fashion Coordinator, Vogue Mexico & Latin America"I'm a proud Mexican, and I always try to show the world the beauty and diversity of our country through the clothes I wear, through the content we curate for the magazine that highlights our unique heritage, or through Instagram by posting snaps of our gorgeous cities, beaches or pueblos."Amanda Kung – Video Media Associate Director, Condé Nast Taiwan"Our two brand channels, Vogue and GQ, have pretty impressive market penetration and are poised to break through a combined 2M subscriber mark by the end of 2021. That will be an exciting milestone for us to reach in Taiwan, where our total population is just under 24 million!"Jorge Madrid – CNX Director, Condé Nast Spain"The new global structure and challenges of digital transformation that are happening at Condé Nast are both a stimulus and a change that we must know how to deal with, and I am very interested in transforming this into opportunities for my team to grow."Archana Thani - Managing Editor, Vogue India"There's been a rise in recognition of Indian talent globally and I'm really excited to champion their initiatives."Milly Tritton – Global Content Manager"It's so important to me that we are elevating great talent and are representative of the modern world in our content, how we connect with our consumers and within the company globally."Camille Darby - VP Brand Marketing, Lifestyle Division"We often think of race, ethnicity and gender when we talk about diversity, which are crucial and must obviously continue to be addressed, but diversity in age, in thought, in experience, in education are also critical."Millie Tran – VP of Content Strategy and Growth"I've thought a lot about the importance of authentic, local storytelling, but also universal themes that resonate in many places across cultures, and what it means to have a global network. We already operate in 31 markets and have a presence in multiple countries around the world and are now working to connect all of those pieces to work together. There is a lot of infrastructure and culture change you need to enable that and that’s what we’re working on."Erin Paterson - Strategy Manager, Email"A lot of times I'll start out writing by trying to make sense of something that feels important to me."Yuki Gobaru - Director, Commercial Products, Condé Nast Japan"I never thought I was a workaholic, but I realized I was! The pandemic has definitely forced me to look more closely at my work-life balance. It's okay to work from home if you find a way to separate work from family time."Heily Guzman - Agency Partner, Video"Being Hispanic, we're taught growing up that if you work hard and do your job well, you will be rewarded in due time. I learned the hard way that in Corporate America, hard work alone is not enough. You have to ask for/demand what you deserve."Alex Freudenberger - Senior Art Director, Condé Nast Germany"Step out of your bubble, be proactive, be critical, embrace who you are and look for your tribe. And when you find it, don't be shy."Salvador Abarca Arriaga - Head of Video, CNÉ Mexico & Latin America"I like to think about my job from a philosophical perspective: I'm someone who lives to make ideas come true by creating tools and implementing systems that manage creativity by giving it direction."Hardip Gill - Service Desk Manager"It's all about helping colleagues, ensuring everyone has the tech they need, enabling them to work effectively and get the best out of their day. I love building relationships and working with colleagues from all different teams and just generally helping people."Global Employee CouncilBorn from an internal call-to-action, Condé Nast’s Global Employee Council provides a platform for employees to identify shared objectives, exchange ideas, and work on community priorities for our global workforce. The Council members are trained annually to recognize best practices and share resources in support of ourCondé Code, specifically sustainability, diversity, and inclusion. They work closely with an executive steering committee composed of senior leaders from across the business to help expand our corporate social impact. The steering committee is co-chaired by Yashica Olden, Chief Diversity & Inclusion Officer, and Alice Pilia, Senior Policy Adviser.
Employee Resource GroupsIn 2021, ourEmployee Resource Groups (ERGs)expanded globally. ERGs are employee-led networks of volunteers who share common cultures, identities, and interests that represent the rich, diverse voices and perspectives at Condé Nast. They are designed to build community, contribute to professional growth, and foster a diverse and inclusive culture where all feel welcome and celebrated. Our ERGs host internal programming including heritage history and cultural celebrations, career development programs, while offering unique representations and expertise. In addition, employee volunteers work with leaders across the organization to raise the visibility of underrepresented people in content development, policies, benefits, and recruitment / onboarding to create a more inclusive Condé Nast culture. The ERGs are Asians at Condé Nast (ACN), Conexión (Hispanic & LatinX), NOIR (Black), Pride (LGBTQIA+), and Women as well as the newly launched Disability, Parents & Family and Environment.
Clickherefor details about life at Condé Nast and each Condé Nast ERG.
PartnershipsPartnerships are essential to our work and we believe that joining forces, providing access to resources, supporting development and knowledge sharing are some of the most effective ways to make meaningful impact. We have created strong alliances with organizations to help structure innovative approaches to collaborative opportunities that effect change inside Condé Nast and within the communities in which we do business.
15% PLEDGEAAJA | ASIAN AMERICAN JOURNALIST ASSOCIATIONBLACK IN FASHION COUNCILBLACK INTERIOR DESIGNERS NETWORK (BIDN)CHAMPIONS OF CHANGE COALITIONCOLORCOMMDISABILITY:INDIVERGENCE ACADEMYEDUCATIONAL ALLIANCEG.I.V.E. AND LA MAISON DES FEMMESGEENA DAVIS INSTITUTE ON GENDER IN MEDIAGOLD HOUSE#HIREBLACKTHE LOWER EASTSIDE GIRLS CLUBMAIP | MULTICULTURAL ADVERTISING INTERNSHIP PROGRAMNABJ | NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF BLACK JOURNALISTSNAHJ | NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF HISPANIC JOURNALISTSPOWERTOFLYSAJA | SOUTH ASIAN JOURNALISTS ASSOCIATIONSISTAS IN SALESCultivating Emerging TalentThere is a saying that talent is distributed equally, but opportunity and access are not. It is critical that we change this. Condé Nast is proud to develop and support initiatives around the globe that create opportunities for diverse talent.
CondéFutureCondé Nast has partnered with theEducational Allianceto launch CondéFuture, a youth enrichment and creative mentoring program designed for high school students in New York City. The Educational Alliance is a community-based organization that works with students from underrepresented communities. The program aims to inspire and nurture a new generation of multimedia artists and to create mentoring and learning opportunities with Condé Nast employees as they take their first steps toward college and careers.
Vogue Business Talent Contest 2021TheVogue Business Talent Contestaims to amplify new voices in the world of fashion and beauty business journalism, encouraging participation from underrepresented groups. The winner is offered a one-month paid internship at Vogue Business and the winning entry will be published in Vogue Business. The two runners-up will each be mentored by a Vogue Business editor for one year. The initiative has launched in the UK and the U.S. The winner of the UK competition is now a full time Vogue Business employee.
CFDA/Vogue Fashion FundTheCFDA/Vogue Fashion Fundwas established in 2003 to provide financial support and business mentoring to the next generation of American fashion designers. Ten rising design stars compete in the annual CFDA/Vogue Fashion Fund competition, which includes a design challenge, a business workshop, a judges panel presentation and an awards gala. In 2021, nine of the twelve finalists identified as people of color. The finalists included Willy Chavarria, Abrima Erwiah of Studio 189, Anifa Mvuemba of Hanifa, LaQuan Smith, Rebecca Henry and Akua Shabaka of House of Aama, Jameel Mohammed of Khiry, Kenneth Nicholson, Edvin Thompson of Theophilio. Past winners include Proenza Schouler, Alexander Wang and Public School.
Afro Fashion Week 2021 "We Are Made in Italy"Condé Nast and Vogue Italia sponsored the 2021 Afro Fashion Week in Milan which featured the “Fab 5," five women designers living and working in Italy.
Meet the women who opened Milan Fashion Weekare Sheetal Shah, Nyny Ryke Goungou, Romy Calzado Celda, Zineb Hazim and Judith Saint Jermain. Led by talent scout Michelle Ngomo and designers Stella Jean and Edward Buchanan, We are Made in Italy (WAMI) was created to identify and generate exposure for underrepresented fashion designers. The fashion shows during Afro Fashion Week present leading and emerging collections by African and Afro-inspired creators.
Black Interior Designers Network (BIDN)In our partnership with theBlack Interior Designers Network, an organization that creates community and provides resources for Black designers, Architectural Digest U.S. launched a digital showhouse prioritizing diversity and inclusivity in design. The 2020 showhouse dubbedThe Iconic Home, elevated the breadth of Black interior designers’ creativity, influence, and professional talent on a national platform, ultimately helping close the opportunity gap. In its second consecutive year, the 2021 Iconic Home Digital showhouse featured work from some of the most successful and inspirational Black designers, artists and architects in the world.
Teen Vogue SummitIn 2021, the Teen Vogueteam hosted theTeen Vogue Summitin Los Angeles. The sold out one-day event included activities and panel discussions about climate change, career building, mental health and representation. Featured speakers were Leah Thomas, founder of Intersectional Environmentalist; Rare Beauty Chief Marketing Officer Katie Welch; Women’s National Basketball Association MVP & Champion and WNBPA President, Nneka Ogwumike; and actor, comedian, and screenwriter Mindy Kaling.
During the event, representatives from the Condé Nast Diversity & Inclusion and Talent Acquisition teams hosted a career booth engaging over 250+ attendees.
Condé Nast Internship ProgramWe relaunched a ten-week internship program in the summer of 2021 in the U.S., which prioritized participation among university students from diverse backgrounds who attended a wide range of schools, community programs, and educational institutions. During the program, 12 interns worked in Editorial, Finance, Legal, Commercial Revenue, Consumer Marketing, and Global Product & Technology, with half the group receiving full-time job offers after graduation.
Condé Nast College U.K.
Based in London’s Soho, theCondé Nast College of Fashion & Designprovides education across numerous areas, including styling, journalism, marketing, branding, graphic design, PR, and digital strategy. The Condé Nast College of Fashion & Design gives students insight into the fashion and creative industries and access to a network of leaders, including editors, designers, and entrepreneurs. Edward Enninful, British Vogue Editor in Chief and Vogue European Editorial Director, chairs a new Advisory Council to develop a new global curriculum for the next generation of creative, diverse talent.
CondéFutureCondé Nast has partnered with theEducational Allianceto launch CondéFuture, a youth enrichment and creative mentoring program designed for high school students in New York City. The Educational Alliance is a community-based organization that works with students from underrepresented communities. The program aims to inspire and nurture a new generation of multimedia artists and to create mentoring and learning opportunities with Condé Nast employees as they take their first steps toward college and careers.
Vogue Business Talent Contest 2021TheVogue Business Talent Contestaims to amplify new voices in the world of fashion and beauty business journalism, encouraging participation from underrepresented groups. The winner is offered a one-month paid internship at Vogue Business and the winning entry will be published in Vogue Business. The two runners-up will each be mentored by a Vogue Business editor for one year. The initiative has launched in the UK and the U.S. The winner of the UK competition is now a full time Vogue Business employee.
CFDA/Vogue Fashion FundTheCFDA/Vogue Fashion Fundwas established in 2003 to provide financial support and business mentoring to the next generation of American fashion designers. Ten rising design stars compete in the annual CFDA/Vogue Fashion Fund competition, which includes a design challenge, a business workshop, a judges panel presentation and an awards gala. In 2021, nine of the twelve finalists identified as people of color. The finalists included Willy Chavarria, Abrima Erwiah of Studio 189, Anifa Mvuemba of Hanifa, LaQuan Smith, Rebecca Henry and Akua Shabaka of House of Aama, Jameel Mohammed of Khiry, Kenneth Nicholson, Edvin Thompson of Theophilio. Past winners include Proenza Schouler, Alexander Wang and Public School.
Afro Fashion Week 2021 "We Are Made in Italy"Condé Nast and Vogue Italia sponsored the 2021 Afro Fashion Week in Milan which featured the “Fab 5," five women designers living and working in Italy.
Meet the women who opened Milan Fashion Weekare Sheetal Shah, Nyny Ryke Goungou, Romy Calzado Celda, Zineb Hazim and Judith Saint Jermain. Led by talent scout Michelle Ngomo and designers Stella Jean and Edward Buchanan, We are Made in Italy (WAMI) was created to identify and generate exposure for underrepresented fashion designers. The fashion shows during Afro Fashion Week present leading and emerging collections by African and Afro-inspired creators.
Black Interior Designers Network (BIDN)In our partnership with theBlack Interior Designers Network, an organization that creates community and provides resources for Black designers, Architectural Digest U.S. launched a digital showhouse prioritizing diversity and inclusivity in design. The 2020 showhouse dubbedThe Iconic Home, elevated the breadth of Black interior designers’ creativity, influence, and professional talent on a national platform, ultimately helping close the opportunity gap. In its second consecutive year, the 2021 Iconic Home Digital showhouse featured work from some of the most successful and inspirational Black designers, artists and architects in the world.
Teen Vogue SummitIn 2021, the Teen Vogueteam hosted theTeen Vogue Summitin Los Angeles. The sold out one-day event included activities and panel discussions about climate change, career building, mental health and representation. Featured speakers were Leah Thomas, founder of Intersectional Environmentalist; Rare Beauty Chief Marketing Officer Katie Welch; Women’s National Basketball Association MVP & Champion and WNBPA President, Nneka Ogwumike; and actor, comedian, and screenwriter Mindy Kaling.
During the event, representatives from the Condé Nast Diversity & Inclusion and Talent Acquisition teams hosted a career booth engaging over 250+ attendees.
Condé Nast Internship ProgramWe relaunched a ten-week internship program in the summer of 2021 in the U.S., which prioritized participation among university students from diverse backgrounds who attended a wide range of schools, community programs, and educational institutions. During the program, 12 interns worked in Editorial, Finance, Legal, Commercial Revenue, Consumer Marketing, and Global Product & Technology, with half the group receiving full-time job offers after graduation.
Condé Nast College U.K.
Based in London’s Soho, theCondé Nast College of Fashion & Designprovides education across numerous areas, including styling, journalism, marketing, branding, graphic design, PR, and digital strategy. The Condé Nast College of Fashion & Design gives students insight into the fashion and creative industries and access to a network of leaders, including editors, designers, and entrepreneurs. Edward Enninful, British Vogue Editor in Chief and Vogue European Editorial Director, chairs a new Advisory Council to develop a new global curriculum for the next generation of creative, diverse talent.
RecognitionForbes2021 The Fashion AwardsASMEThe Association of LGBTQ JournalistsThe Society of American Travel Writers FoundationAmerican Illustration - American PhotographyOur 2021 DataGender All Staff GlobalRace / Ethnicity All Staff USTotal Global LGBTQIA+ *14%Total Global Non-Binary Employees *1%Total Global Parents *33%Total Global Caregivers *5%Total Global Disability (Non-U.S.) *6%Total Global ERG Members30+%Veterans (U.S.)0.4%# of Employee Attendees - D&I Events3,650+All data represents January 1, 2021 through December 31, 2021. Totals may not add up to 100% due to rounding. All data is based on voluntary employee self-identification. Data was supplied by the Condé Nast People Team. Race and ethnicity data reflects our U.S. workforce only, where we can legally collect such information. *Global data for LGBTQIA+, non-binary, disability, parents and caregivers are from the annual employee engagement survey. All data excludes freelancers. Editorial data includes Condé Nast Entertainment (CNE) and senior leadership is defined as the top three of eleven possible job levels at the company.
