old id = 3816
8 Best Cheap Laptops (2022): Our Picks for $700 or Less | WIRED
2021
https://www.wired.com/gallery/best-cheap-laptops

To revisit this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
To revisit this article, select My Account, thenView saved storiesScott GilbertsonNeed a Cheap Laptop? These Are Our FavoritesComputers have putpeople on the moon and sent cute robots to Mars. You'd think somewhere in the miraculous technological utopia of our age, we'd also be able to get a decent laptop without spending a fortune.
All I want is something portable enough that I don't get back strain from toting it around all day, and powerful enough to get some basic work done. A light,fast-enoughlaptop for under $700—is that so much to ask? Fortunately, it is possible, but there are some trade-offs. You can't edit videos or play hardcore games on these machines. The displays won't be as sharp as more expensive models. But we've tested a ton of cheap laptops, and for everyday tasks, these machines will do everything you ask of them—and leave some money in your bank account.
Keep an eye on the OS of the machine; most of these still come with Windows 10, but some offer a free upgrade to Windows 11. Also, check outour other buying guides, including theBest LaptopsandBest MacBooks.
Updated March 2022: We've updated several models to their latest versions and updated prices throughout.
Special offer for Gear readers: Get a1-Year Subscription toWIREDfor $5 ($25 off). This includes unlimited access toWIRED.
com and our print magazine (if you'd like). Subscriptions help fund the work we do every day.
If you buy something using links in our stories, we may earn a commission. This helps support our journalism.
Learn more. Please also considersubscribing to WIREDBest All AroundWIRED:Lenovo's AMD-based IdeaPad 5, which comes with a Ryzen 5 processor, is the best budget laptop for most people. You get plenty of power, a very nice 14-inch IPS display, 8 gigabytes of RAM, and a 256-gigabyte SSD. The 360-degree hinge converts it to tablet mode or stand mode for watching movies. To take full advantage of the two-in-one design, be sure to grab thedigital pen ($45). If you're flush with cash, the even more powerful Ryzen 7 version can be had for a little more ($789).
TIRED:There's no place to stow the pen. The screen could be brighter.
Best 15-Inch LaptopWIRED:The Acer Aspire 3 offers the best value among all the 15-inch laptops I tested. You should get the model with an Intel Core i5 (or AMD 5000 series chip), integrated graphics, 8 gigabytes of RAM, and a 15.6-inch IPS display (1,920 x 1,080 pixels). It's big, and the display is not the sharpest, but it won't strain your eyes. There are ports galore (Ethernet, USB, USB-C, HDMI, headphone jack), and it's powerful enough to watch 4K video.
TIRED:The speakers aren't very loud.
Best Budget PowerhouseWIRED:We initially loved Acer's 2021 version of the Swift 3, but it started a little over our $700 budget. Now that it's more affordable, this notebook is a better buy. It wraps a powerful Intel Core i7 chip, 8 gigabytes of RAM, and a 256-gigabyte SSD in a thin, no-nonsense design with a 1,920 x 1,080-pixel IPS LCD display. (IPS is a little nicer than some types of LCD.)The Swift 3 scored well for battery life in our video-based battery drain test, and it boasts four USB ports, including one USB-C port. I've also used the Intel i5 model, which gets even better battery life but with a noticeable loss of computing power.
TIRED:This was the most expensive "budget" laptop we tested when it came out, though it is now much more affordable.
Best for RAM-Hungry TasksWIRED:The HP Pavilion line has been a stalwart of reliable, if somewhat boring, laptops for what seems like ages now. This 14-inch model ticks all the basic cheap-laptop boxes, with an 11th-generation Intel Core i5 processor, integrated graphics, and plenty of ports (including two USB-A, one USB-C, HDMI, and SD card reader).
The Pavilion is also notable for not overcharging for RAM; you can double your RAM to 16 gigabytes for $80. Unfortunately, Amazon is charging a bit more for Windows 11, but it's probably worth it, since Windows 10 won't be supported forever. You also get some decently loud speakers and a very nice keyboard with this one.
TIRED:What you don't get in the Pavilion is great battery life. It's also on the heavy side, at nearly 4 pounds.
Best for Chromebook LoversWIRED: If you're all-in on Google's Chrome OS, Acer's Chromebook Spin 713 offers the best experience you'll get outside of Google's much more expensive Pixelbook laptops. The 8 gigabytes of RAM and Intel Core i5 chip make Chrome OS plenty snappy, and the Chromebook Spin 713 manages nearly 12 hours of battery in our video drain test. The screen is wonderfully bright, and the 3:2 aspect ratio is nice for editing documents and browsing the web.
TIRED: The Intel Core i5 model is expensive for a Chromebook. We've also linked to the cheaper, still very capable, Core i3 model below.
Best Tablet for Under $400WIRED:Do you really need a cheaplaptop? Could you get by with a tablet? The 2021 10.2-inchApple iPadwill be the perfect laptop replacement for some people. If you want great battery life and something that doubles as a way to browse the web from the couch, watch movies in bed, and still get a bit of work done during the day, the iPad fits the bill.
TIRED:The rub, or potential rub, lies in getting work done during the day. If you're mostly working with word processing documents, web-based tools, and other tasks the iPad is good at, it works great. If your work involves software that doesn't run on the iPad, get a real laptop.
Best Chrome OS TabletWIRED:The Lenovo Chromebook Duet (8/10, WIRED Recommends) is the most fun you'll have with Chrome OS. Some tasks, such as editing photos, are a challenge on its tiny screen, but it's perfect for browsing the web, emailing, editing documents online, and staying in touch with family via video chat. It's compact, lightweight, and surprisingly well built, and the keyboard is as good as what you get with the more expensive iPad or Surface Go.
TIRED:There's no SD card slot to expand your memory, so go for the more expensive model with a 1-terabyte drive. The caveats about Chrome OS apply here as well: This is a computer meant for web-based tasks, and that's it.
Best Cheap Windows TabletWIRED:TheSurface Go 3gives you most, though not all, of the power of Windows in a very lightweight, portable form. It can also double as a media tablet when you're not working. There's a lot here to love: It's fanless, the 10.5-inch display is sharp and bright, a micro SD card slot means you can add extra drive space, and the cover is a really lovely little keyboard.
TIRED:The battery life is worse than the Surface Go 2. Microsoft gets ya in the details; the very nice keyboard cover isstill sold separately for a whopping $99. To get 8 GB of RAM and the keyboard, the price almost doubles.
How to Find a Good LaptopIf your budget is tight and you want the most bang for your buck, or you just want to keep something out of the landfill, the used or refurbished laptop market is worth considering. I've had great luck buying used laptops on eBay from all sorts of sellers (both pros and regular people).
To score the best deal, make sure you know the market. Do some research to figure out a machine that suits your needs. The easiest to come by, and therefore (usually) the best deals, tend to be on more boring, business-oriented models. I happen to like ThinkPads, which are used by—and then dumped all at once by—large corporations, which means there are lots to choose from, and they're cheap.
Aim for these specs:Try to get a laptop with at least a 10th-generation Intel Core i3 processor, 8 GB of RAM, 128 GB of storage (preferably a solid-state drive), and at least a 13-inch display that's close to HD.
Finding used laptops on eBay:Once you know what you want, search for it on eBay. Scroll down and check the option to show only "sold listings." Now take the 10 most recent sales, add up the prices, and divide by 10. That's the average price; don't pay more than that.
Keep the lowest price in mind—that's the great deal price. Now, uncheck the Sold Listing option. See what's between the lowest price and that average price. Those are the deals you can consider. I suggest watching a few. Don't bid or participate at all. Just watch them until the end and see how high the auctions end up going.
Once you have a feel for the market and what you should be paying, you'll know when you've found a deal. When you find it, wait. Don't bid until the last few minutes of the auction. You don't want other bidders to have a chance to react. Remember that if you miss out on something, it's not the end of the world. There's always something new being listed on eBay.
WIRED COUPONSExtra savings up to $15 with TurboTax discountH&R Block Promotion: Free online tax filingShop shoes on sale for under $100 from Finish LineExtra $10 off when using this DoorDash coupon codeExtra 30% off your online order with Groupon promo codeExtra 8% off your hotel reservation with Expedia promo codeMore From WIREDContact© 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of ourUser AgreementandPrivacy Policy and Cookie StatementandYour California Privacy Rights.
Wiredmay earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
Ad Choices
