old id = 3819
11 Best Tablets (2022): For Work, Play, Kids, and More | WIRED
2021
https://www.wired.com/gallery/the-best-tablets

To revisit this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
To revisit this article, select My Account, thenView saved storiesJulian ChokkattuJeffrey Van CampThe Best Tablets for Work and PlayTablets aren't essential,but they are nice to have around. A good tablet can be a portable TV screen around the houseanda way to get some light work done away from your desk. Also, with a wealth of apps for drawing, painting, and making music, they're a great outlet for your creative impulses.
The iPad's ease of use and best-in-breed software makes it the obvious choice for most people, but if you don't want an iPad, other options exist. Android tablets are making abit of a comebackrecently, and Google hasrefocused its effortson improving the tablet experience. Amazon's Fire tablets are also an affordable way to get the basics like watching movies and browsing the web, as long as you don't mind their limitations. If you want a tablet that can double as a laptop, an iPad or a Windows 2-in-1 might be your best bet. Our picks of the best tablets can help you decide.
Be sure to check out ourother buying guides, including theBest iPads,Best iPad Accessories,Best Fire Tablets, andBest Chromebooks.
Updated April 2022: We've added the Lenovo Yoga Tab 13 and TCL Tab Pro 5G.
Special offer for Gear readers: Get a1-year subscription toWIREDfor $5 ($25 off). This includes unlimited access toWIRED.
com and our print magazine (if you'd like). Subscriptions help fund the work we do every day.
If you buy something using links in our stories, we may earn a commission. This helps support our journalism.
Learn more. Please also considersubscribing to WIREDBest for Most PeopleIt's surprisingly hard to find another tablet that performs as smoothly as Apple's iPad. The ninth-generation model (8/10, WIRED Recommends) uses the sameA13 Bionic chipthat powers theiPhone 11, which outclasses similarly priced slates. Sure, it looks like an iPad from five years ago, with thick borders around the screen and a classic home button (with Touch ID), but maybe that's what you want. It's theonlyiPad with this design anymore, and the only one that comes with an audio jack.
The best addition to the 2021 model is the 12-megapixel selfie camera with support for Center Stage. The camera will ensure you're always visible in the frame, handy if you're cooking and Zooming with mom. You also get Apple's class-leading ecosystem of tablet-optimized apps, which truly make this a slate capable of entertainmentandwork. The latter is especially true if you hook up Apple'sSmart Keyboard(or athird-party alternative). It supports the first-genApple Penciltoo, but this is the only iPad with a larger air gap between the glass and screen. There's a discernible space between your fingertip and the actual pixels, which makes using the iPad feel a little less natural than its siblings. If you need a slate for sketching, upgrade to another iPad.
Best UpgradeIf you want a more modern-looking tablet, try Apple's new iPad Air (8/10, WIRED Recommends). It's powered by Apple's M1 processor, which makes this the most powerful tablet for the money. You can play demanding games, edit batches of RAW photos, render 3D designs, and so much more, but you'll likely start to feel limited by the iPadOS operating system, which isn't as convenient to use for desktop-grade multitasking as a MacBook. This slate delivers slim bezels around the 10.9-inch screen, USB-C for charging, and supports thesecond-generation Apple Pencil(Amazon), which magnetically attaches to the top and recharges wirelessly. That also makes this one of the best tablets for sketching, as the laminated display offers a more natural drawing experience. There's no Face ID, but Touch ID is integrated into the power button.
★ The ultimate iPad:The12.9-inch 2021 iPad Pro(8/10, WIRED Recommends) is much more expensive at $1,099, but it's more feature-rich. The large screen makes it even better for drawing. It hasMini-LED backlighting technology, which outputs a brighter display with better contrast, though the Pro has the same level of performance due to the M1 chip. Youdoget a120-Hz screen refresh rate, two extra speakers, 5G, Face ID, and a lidar sensor, among other perks.
Best Android TabletEvery time I boot up the Tab P11 Plus, I spend a few minutes trying to figure out exactly how Lenovo managed to make this tablet for under $350. The MediaTek Helio G90T chip inside is powerful enough that the P11 Plus rarely feels slow—even games likeDead Cellsrun well. (I tested the version with 6 gigabytes of RAM; the 4-GB version might not perform as well when you juggle a lot of apps.) The 11-inch LCD screen looks sharp thanks to the 2K resolution, plus it gets really bright. It's slim and portable, yet large enough to watch TV shows, and the quad speakers sound great.
If you want to get some work done, Lenovo's Productivity Mode kicks in when it detects a Bluetooth keyboard (or you can snagLenovo's keyboard and kickstand cover combo for just $65). Apps go into a resizable windowed mode here, so it feels a bit more like a laptop. It's in no way a laptop replacement, but you can dosomework on it in brief stints. When I tried to work off of it in one sitting, it lasted around seven hours. But if you're using it for a few hours every day, you'll only have to recharge it on the third or fourth day. The two big downsides? Lenovo will update this slate to Android 12 but hasn't committed to anything beyond that (you'll get two years of security updates). There's also no headphone jack, so you'll need touse wireless earbudsora USB-C adapter.
Best Tablet Under $200Amazon's Fire tablets aren't for everyone. Theyreallypush Amazon Prime services and apps, but they're best for more passive tasks like playing games and watching movies. There's no Google Play Store, so not every Android app is readily available. Still, for $150, it's hard to beat the 2021 Fire HD 10 (7/10, WIRED Recommends), which is ourfavorite Fire Tablet. It has enough power for most tasks, even some light work if you snag the “Productivity Bundle” Amazon sells, which includes a Bluetooth keyboard case and a year of Microsoft 365. There's a USB-C port, so there's a good chance you can charge it with the same cable as your laptop orAndroid phone, and it has hands-free Alexa support, meaning it can double as anEcho Show. If you snag the Fire HD 10 Plus model, you get an extra gig of RAM and wireless charging.
Note:Amazon steeply discounts its Fire tablets onPrime DayandBlack Friday(and frequently throughout the year), so try to avoid paying full price.
Best Tablet Under $100The 2020Fire HD 8 and Fire HD 8 Plustablets aren't drastically different from the Fire HD 10. They perform well, have a USB-C charging port, stereo sound, and hands-free Alexa. You get all that in a travel-friendly 8-inch size. The screen isn'tasnice, and it can be a little tough to see images and text clearly if you're outside, but this is the best tablet you can get without spending a lot of money.
Paying the extra $20 for the Fire HD 8 Plus is wise, as it nets you extra RAM (which helps when you're scrolling the web or juggling multiple apps) and wireless charging, so you can recharge it on almost any charging pad. You can also use Amazon'swireless charging dock, which props up the tablet and turns it into an Echo Show while it's juicing up. Either way, consider picking up Amazon'smagnetic coverto hold the tablet steady when you're binging TV shows.
An Android Tablet With a StylusIf you're after a large-screen Android tablet experience but don't want to shell out for it, the Tab S7 FE (Fan Edition) is a good middle ground. You get a spacious 12.4-inch LCD screen that's sharp and bright; the speakers are wonderful; and Samsung also includes the S Pen stylus, which magnetically sticks to the back of the slate. It's no Apple Pencil, but it does the job for simple doodles and for marking up documents. Samsung also has akeyboard cover you can buy separatelyif you want to type away on this tablet, and its DeX mode offers up a workable desktop-like experience. Where this tablet stands out is its long software support: It will get five years of security updates and three Android OS upgrades. Unfortunately, there'snoheadphone jack.
I wasn't thrilled with its performance—it stuttered now and then a little too much considering the price, though I was still able to run every app and game I regularly use just fine. This is likely due to the limited 4 gigabytes of RAM in the 5G model I tested. The 5G version also runs off the Qualcomm Snapdragon 750G processor, whereas the Wi-Fi model uses the better-performing Snapdragon 778G. It's odd. I recommend going with the Wi-Fi Tab S7 FE with 128 or 256 gigabytes of storage, which should bump the RAM up to 6 and 8 GB, respectively. This tablet is frequently on sale, so those specifications should cost you less than $550.
An OLED Android TabletDesperately want an AMOLED screen on your tablet? The display tech gives you wonderfully deep blacks and vibrant colors and is a significant step up from LCD screens. Lenovo's P12 Pro has it, paired with a 2K resolution, and it's excellent. The tablet has yet to slow down in performance, thanks to the Snapdragon 870 chip inside, and it comes with a stylus. (You can get the bundle withthe keyboard coverif you want to use it for some work.) Unlike the Tab S7 FE, there's even a fingerprint sensor! Unfortunately, unlike the Tab S7 FE, it will only get one Android OS upgrade and two years of security updates. It also doesn't have a headphone jack.
I've been using a beta version ofAndroid 12Lon it, which better optimizes the interface for the larger screen size. It still has a long way to go, but it's a step up from the current experience. It'll get this update later this year.
Best Kids TabletWhen you're giving a tablet to a kid, you want something durable and cheap. That way if it breaks, a replacement won't be too costly. Amazon offers kid-friendly versions of all its Fire tablets, and theFire HD 8 Kids Editionsits in the sweet spot of having a kid-friendly size and a wallet-friendly price. It's the exact same as the Fire HD 8 above, but the extra $50 gets you a bulky case to protect the tablet and a two-year worry-free damage plan. That means if your kid breaks it, you can return it and Amazon will send you a replacement for free. You also get a year of Amazon'sKids+ service, which provides access to kid-friendly books, movies, games, and apps, all with parental controls. It's $3 per month after the first year.
There's also the larger Fire HD 10 Kids Edition, which comes in two variants. One forkids aged 3 to 7, and aKids Pro Editionfor kids aged 6 to 12. Both are pricier and might be too big for younger children to comfortably use. Check out ourBest Kids Tablets guidefor more recommendations.
Best Portable TabletWant something a little bigger than your phone, but still pocketable and easy to travel with? The 8.3-inch iPad Mini (8/10, WIRED Recommends) should be up your alley. You get a compact tablet with a refreshed and modern iPad Pro-like design. It has the latest A15 Bionic processor, the same that powers theiPhone 13 range, and Touch ID embedded inside the power button. It also features Center Stage in the camera like the aforementioned iPads and USB-C for charging. It's unbelievably small and cute, and you can attach thesecond-gen Apple Pencilto it for on-the-go sketching.
Luxe Android TabletsWe have not tested Samsung's latestluxe Android tabletsyet (it seems it may be facing someshipping issues in general). Ihavetested every major Samsung tablet for the past few years, and I can tell you that these are likely very, very nice. You can choose between the 11-inch Tab S8, the 12.4-inch Tab S8+, and the massive 14.6-inch Tab S8 Ultra. The biggest difference between them other than size is that the Tab S8 has an LCD screen, whereas the other two use OLED, which will net you deep blacks and richer colors. If you're after the best Android tablet experience around, this is it. The stylus, which magnetically sticks to the back, is included with all three too.
All that said, I just can't see a world where shelling out for the $1,100 Tab S8 Ultra makes sense. You're not going to get as many tablet-optimized apps as an iPad Pro (in general, there are more and better tablet apps for creative pros on iPads too), and you can buy agreat laptopor two-in-one (see below) for that price if you want to get some real work done. If it's any consolation, these tablets have some of the longest software support you'll find on Android, so at least they should last a while before you'll want to upgrade.
Best 2-in-1Who says tablets need to run operating systems originally designed for smartphones? Microsoft'sSurface lineemploys Windows, making it a suitable choice for heavy, desktop-grade workflows. The Surface Pro 8 (7/10, WIRED Recommends) is your best choice: It's powerful, has a large 13-inch screen, and has a120-Hz refresh rate. The best part is the built-in kickstand, which lets you plop it down on almost any surface. It's notaspolished as an iPad in tablet mode, but Windows 11 has larger touch targets that make it easier to use. Our main gripe? Battery life is lackluster.
TheSurface Go 3suffers from similar battery woes, but it's a cheaper option. It's not as powerful, so it's better suited for simpler tasks like writing emails, browsing the web, and watching Netflix.
We recommend the Surface Pro 8 with the Intel Core i5 CPU, 8 GB of RAM, and a 128-GB SSD for most people.
Honorable MentionsWe test tons of tablets every year. Here are a few others we like, just not as much as our picks above.
Lenovo Yoga Tab 13 Android Tablet for $400:This began life as aspendy tablet, but it's powerful thanks to the Qualcomm Snapdragon 870 inside. I used it as a TV replacement for a few weeks when my TV's backlighting died, and it was snappy and responsive. The quad JBL speakers sound great and get really loud, and the 2K-resolution screen is colorful, bright, and sharp. Best of all, this is one of the few tablets that come with a built-in kickstand and a Micro-HDMI port to turn it into a secondary display for your laptop. The only downside? You'll need to keep the charger handy. The battery depletes at an astonishing speed even when you'renotusing the tablet.
TCL Tab Pro 5G Android Tablet for $400:Unless youreallywant 5G connectivity and are prepared to sign up for a monthly data-only plan with Verizon, I think Lenovo's P11 Plus is the better buy. This TCL has a solid 2K LCD screen, but it's not as contrasty and colorful as our top Android pick. Its speakers are nice, as is performance—it ran all the usual apps just fine. However, the 10-inch screen size isn't large enough to make some apps split into two columns when in vertical orientation (not the case on the P11). At least you get a fingerprint scanner.
Nokia T20 Android Tablet for $250:I very nearly gave theNokia T20our top Android tablet spot above. Ireallyliked my time with it. What brought it down was … my time with the Lenovo P11 Plus, which performed better and had a nicer screen—all for not much more money. Still, the T20 will run most apps and games, it has a nice 10.3-inch screen that's not too big and not too small, and there's a headphone jack. The speakers and screen are just OK. Unlike Lenovo, HMD Global is promising two OS upgrades and three years of security updates. Its price has been slipping and has dipped to as low as $175, which makes it a steal.
Samsung Galaxy Tab A7 Android Tablet for $220:The A7 is a fine Android tablet if you want to stick with Samsung. The Nokia above performs better, but the screen is nicer here, and the speakers sound richer.
Great Tablet AccessoriesTablets often don't come with kickstands or enough ports, so it's a good idea to snag a few accessories to enhance your experience. These are some of our favorite tablet accessories, many of which you can also find in ourBest iPad Accessoriesguide.
Satechi Aluminum Desktop Stand for $45:This is my favorite tablet stand, so much so that I recently took it with me on a trip. It packs down relatively well, and it isverystable—there's no wobbling around here. You can also adjust the angle quite a bit. It works with my 12.9-inch iPad Pro perfectly, so it can handle huge sizes too.
Twelve South Compass Pro Stand for $52:This is made for iPads, but I've had no trouble using it for plenty of other tablets. It's more travel-friendly than the Satechi above and fairly stable, but when I lift the tablet off, the back leg tends to change positions. You can angle it pretty low for sketching or keep it upright for watching movies. Unlike the Satechi, it's not a great option for keeping the tablet upright on a mattress.
Lamicall Gooseneck Tablet Holder for $21:I've used this on my bed frame to hold up the Galaxy Tab S7 FE for months. The gooseneck requires a bit of finagling to get to the right position, and if you're constantly tapping the tablet, itwilljiggle around. But it's a great hands-free way to watch movies. You can affix the clamp to any surface, like a desk or kitchen counter.
Twelve South HoverBar Duo Mount/Stand for $80: This one has been attached to my desk for several months to prop up the Nokia T20. You can use it as a stand or as an arm mount, and I prefer the latter. It's sturdy and adjustable, and best of all, it doesn't wiggle around as much as the Lamicall above when you tap the screen.
Vissles LP85 Mechanical Bluetooth Keyboard for $119:If you want to use a third-party Bluetooth keyboard with your tablet, a cheap one (like this Logitech) will do the job perfectly. But if you're a mechanical keyboard snob like me, this Vissles is an upgrade that's pretty easy to tote around. You can connect it to multiple devices and switch between them quickly, the keys light up in different, configurable colors, and best of all, it delivers the clickety-clackety experience you want with a mechanical keyboard. It needs to be recharged every three to four days.
Twelve South StayGo Mini USB-C Hub for $60:This works with iPads and other tablets just fine. You can either plug it in and keep it flush with the edge of a slate or use the included cord to keep it extended. You get a USB-C port you can use for pass-through charging, a USB-A, an HDMI, and a headphone jack.
Anker Nano Pro Charging Adapter for $20:Most tablets charge at around 18 watts, so this tiny 20-watt charger from Anker will do the job just fine. The plugs don't fold, but it's seriously compact. If your tabletdoessupport faster charging—for example, the Galaxy Tab S7 FE supports 45-watt charging—then I recommendSatechi's 108-watt three-port USB-C charger ($75). This will let you charge your phone, tablet, and laptop all off of the same plug.
WIRED COUPONSExtra 20% off sitewide - Dyson promo code 2022GoPro Hot Deal: $150 off the new HERO10 Black BonesSamsung coupon - 45% off select items + free shippingExtra $100 off XPS & Inspiron laptops, desktops & 2 in 1s with Dell coupon codeDeal of the Day: 1-day flash sale for 20% off electronics & appliancesAT&T Internet promo code - $50 reward with AT&T Fiber orderMore From WIREDContact© 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of ourUser AgreementandPrivacy Policy and Cookie StatementandYour California Privacy Rights.
Wiredmay earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
Ad Choices
