old id = 4070
Translation: Online Data Security Management Regulations (Draft for Comment) – Nov. 2021
2021
https://digichina.stanford.edu/work/translation-online-data-security-management-regulations-draft-for-comment-nov-2021

Stanford UniversityTranslation: Online Data Security Management Regulations (Draft for Comment) – Nov. 2021Draft regulations compile and in places expand mandates under major data lawsPublishedDecember 6, 2021By:Rogier CreemersHunter DorwartGraham Websterby:Rogier CreemersHunter DorwartGraham WebsterPublishedDecember 6, 2021Translation by Rogier Creemers and Hunter Dorwart. Edited by Graham Webster.
Date issued: Nov. 14, 2021Online Data Security Management Regulations (Draft for Comment)Chapter I: General PrinciplesArticle 1: In order to standardize online data handling activities, ensure data security, protect the lawful rights and interests of individuals and organizations in cyberspace, maintain national security and the public interest, and on the basis of laws such as the “Cybersecurity Law of the People’s Republic of China,” the “Data Security Law of the People’s Republic of China,” and the “Personal Information Protection Law of the People’s Republic of China,” these Regulations are formulated.
Article 2:These Regulations apply to the use of networks to conduct data handling activities within the [mainland] territory of the People’s Republic of China, as well as to the supervision and management of online data security.
These Regulations apply to activities outside the territory of the People’s Republic of China of handling the data of individuals and organizations within the territory of the People’s Republic of China, where one of the following circumstances is present:These Regulations do not apply to natural persons' data handling activities for personal or household affairs.
Article 3:The State comprehensively plans development and security; it persists in equally emphasizing stimulation of data development and use, and ensuring data security; it strengthens the construction of data security protection capabilities, ensures the lawful, orderly, and free flow of data, and stimulates the lawful, reasonable, and efficient use of data.
Article 4:The State supports data development, use, and security protection-related technology, product and service innovation, and talent training.
The State encourages State bodies, sectoral organizations, enterprises, educational and scientific research bodies, related specialized bodies, etc., to conduct data development, use, and security protection cooperation, and conduct data security propaganda, education, and training.
Article 5:The State establishes a categorized and graded protection system for data. According to the influence and degree of importance of data towards national security, the public interest or the lawful rights and interests of individuals or organizations, data is classified into ordinary data, important data, and core data, different protection measures are undertaken for different grades of data.
The State conducts focused protection of personal information and important data, and implements strict protection for core data.
All localities and all departments shall, according to the State data categorization and grading requirements, conduct categorized and graded management of data within their localities, their departments, and in related sectors and areas.
Article 6:Data handlers bear responsibility for the security of the handled data, they undertake data security protection duties, accept government and social supervision, and bear social responsibility.
Data handlers shall, according to the provisions of laws and administrative regulations as well as the mandatory requirements of national standards, establish and perfect data security management systems and technical protection mechanisms.
Article 7:The State promotes public data openness and sharing, stimulates data development and use, and implements supervision and management over public data according to the law.
The State establishes and completes data transaction management systems, clarifies data transaction bodies’ establishment and operations standards, standardizes data exchange and transacting activities, and ensures the lawful and orderly flow of data.
Chapter II: General ProvisionsArticle 8:Any individual or organization engaging in data handling activities shall abide by the law and administrative regulations, respect social morals and ethics, and may not engage in the following activities:No individual or organization may, where they know or should know other persons are engaging in activities mentioned in the previous Paragraph, provide them with technical support, tools, software, advertising, payment settlement, or other such services.
Article 9:Data handlers shall adopt the necessary measures, including back-ups, encryption, access control, etc., to ensure that data is not leaked, stolen, distorted, destroyed, lost, or illegally used; to respond to data security incidents; to prevent unlawful and criminal activities targeting and using data; and to safeguard the integrity, confidentiality, and usability of data.
Data handlers shall, according to the requirements of the cybersecurity multi-level protection system, strengthen security protection of data handling systems, data transmission networks, data storage environments, etc. Systems handling important data shall, in principle, satisfy the requirements of the third tier or higher of cybersecurity multi-level protection and critical information infrastructure security protection; systems handling core data will be strictly protected according to relevant regulations.
Data handlers shall use encryption to protect important data and core data.
Article 10:When data handlers discover that leaks or vulnerabilities exist in the online products or services they use or provide, or there are risks threatening national security, endangering the public interest, etc., they shall immediately adopt remedial measures.
Article 11:Data handlers shall establish data security emergency response mechanisms, timely activate the emergency response mechanism when a data security incident occurs, adopt measures to prevent harm from expanding, and eliminate the security threat. Where security incidents result in harm to individuals or organizations, data handlers shall notify the affected party within three working days about the incident and risk situation, the harmful consequences, remedial measures already adopted, etc., through means such as telephone, text message, instant messaging tools, e-mail, etc. Where it is impossible to contact them, it is permitted to use public announcements for notification. Where laws or administrative regulations permit non-notification, those provisions apply. Where a security incident is suspected to be a crime, data handlers shall file the matter with the public security bodies according to regulations. When a leak, destruction, loss, or other such data security incident occurs with important data or the personal information of 100,000 individuals or more, data handlers shall also fulfill the following duties:Article 12:Where data handlers provide personal information to third parties, or share, trade or entrust the handling of important data, they shall abide by the following provisions:Data recipients shall fulfill the agreed duties, and may not handle personal information and important data outside of the agreed purpose, scope, or handling methods.
Article 13:Data handlers conducting the following activities shall report for cybersecurity review according to relevant State provisions:Large-scale Internet platform operators establishing headquarters or operations centers, or research and development centers, abroad, shall report the matter to the national cybersecurity and informatization department and competent department.
Article 14:Where data handlers merge, reorganize, or separate, the data recipient shall continue to fulfill data security protection duties; where this involves important data or the personal information of 1 million or more individuals, they shall report the matter to the districted city-level competent department; where data handlers are dissolved, or are declared bankrupt, they shall report the matter to the districted city-level competent department, and move or delete data according to related requirements; where the competent department is unclear, they shall report the matter to the districted city-level cybersecurity and informatization department.
Article 15:Data handlers obtaining data from other channels shall fulfill data security protection duties according to these Regulations.
Article 16:State bodies shall, according to the provisions of laws and administrative regulations, and the mandatory requirements of national standards, establish and complete data security management systems, implement data security protection responsibilities, and ensure the security of government data.
Article 17:When data handlers adopt automated tools to access or collect data, they shall assess the effect on online services brought about by their nature and functions; they may not interfere with the regular functioning of online services.
Where automated tool access or collection of data violates laws, administrative regulations or sectoral self-discipline conventions, influences the regular functioning of online services, or infringes other persons’ intellectual property rights or other such lawful rights and interests, data handlers shall cease access or collection of data and adopt corresponding remedial measures.
Article 18:Data handlers shall establish convenient data security complaints channels, and promptly collect and deal with data security complaint reports.
Data handlers shall publish contact methods and information about the persons responsible for the receipt of complaints and reports; annually publish and disclose details about the number of personal information security complaints received and accepted, the complaint handling situation, and the average processing time; and accept social supervision.
Chapter III: Personal Information ProtectionArticle 19:Data handlers handling personal information shall have a clear and reasonable purpose and abide by the principles of legality, propriety, and necessity. Where they handle personal information on the basis of individual consent, they shall satisfy the following requirements:Article 20:Data handlers handling personal information shall formulate personal information handling rules and strictly abide by them. Personal information handling rules shall be published openly and in one collection, be easy to access and placed in an eye-attracting position, have clear and concrete content, use simple, clear and common language, and systematically and completely explain personal information handling circumstances to individuals.
Personal information handling rules shall include but not be limited to the following content:Article 21:Where individual consent shall be obtained for handling personal information, data handlers shall abide by the following provisions:Where a change occurs in the personal information handling purpose, handling method and the handled personal information categories, data handlers shall obtain individual consent again, and simultaneously revise the personal information handling rules.
Where disputes exist in relation to the validity of acts of individual consent, data handlers bear evidentiary responsibility.
Article 22:Where one of the following circumstances is present, data handlers shall delete personal information within 15 working days or apply anonymization processing:Where it is difficult to delete personal information within 15 working days because deletion of personal information is difficult to realize technically, or because of operational complexities and other such reasons, data handlers may not conduct handling outside of storage and adopting necessary security protection measures, and shall make a reasonable explanation to the individual.
Where laws and administrative regulations provide otherwise, those provisions are followed.
Article 23:Where individuals submit reasonable requests to consult, reproduce, correct, complete, limit the handling of, or delete their personal information, data handlers shall fulfill the following duties:Where laws and administrative regulations provide otherwise, those provisions are followed.
Article 24:For personal information transfer requests meeting the following conditions, data handlers shall provide transfer services to another data handler assigned by the individual to access and obtain the personal information:Where data handlers discover that there is a risk that the other data handler receiving personal information handles personal information illegally, they shall conduct a reasonable risk notification on the personal information transfer request.
Where requests for personal information transfer are frequent, clearly exceeding a reasonable scope, data handlers may obtain reasonable fees.
Article 25:Where data handlers use biometric characteristics to conduct individual identity verification, they shall conduct a risk assessment of its necessity and security; they may not make faces, gaits, fingerprints, irises, voice prints, and other such biometric characteristics into the sole personal identity verification method in order to force individuals to consent to the collection of their personal biometric characteristic information.
Where laws or administrative regulations provide otherwise, those provisions are followed.
Article 26:Where data handlers handle the personal information of more than 1 million persons, they shall also abide by the provisions in Chapter IV of these Regulations concerning important data handlers.
Chapter IV: Security of Important DataArticle 27:All localities and all departments are to, according to relevant State requirements and standards, organize data handlers in their localities and their departments as well as related sectors and areas to identify important data and core data, organize the formulation of important data and core data catalogs for their localities, their departments,and related sectors and areas, and report them to the national cybersecurity and informatization department.
Article 28:Important data handlers shall appoint a person responsible for data security, and establish a data security management body. The data security management body is under the leadership of the person responsible for data security, and fulfills the following duties:The person responsible for data security shall have specialized data security knowledge and corresponding management work experience, be appointed from the data handler’s policy decision-level members, and have the power to directly reflect the data security situation to the cyberspace and informatization departments and competent and supervising departments.
Article 29:Handlers of important data shall file with the districted city-level cybersecurity and informatization department within 15 working days of identifying their important data; the filing content includes:Where a major change occurs in the purpose, scope, categories, data security protection measures, etc., of handled data, filing shall be renewed.
On the basis of the departmental division of duties and responsibilities, cybersecurity and informatization departments are to share filing information with relevant departments.
Article 30:Handlers of important data shall formulate data security training plans, annually organize and conduct all-staff data security education and training; the annual education and training time for data security-related technical and management staff may not be less than 20 hours.
Article 31:Handlers of important data shall give preference to purchasing secure and trustworthy network products and services.
Article 32:Data handlers handling important data or listing on stock exchanges abroad shall conduct a data security assessment once every year themselves, or entrust a data security service body to do so, and submit the data security assessment report of the previous year to the districted city-level cybersecurity and informatization department by January 31 every year; the annual data security assessment report’s content includes:Data handlers shall preserve risk assessment reports for at least three years.
On the basis of departmental divisions of duties and responsibilities, cybersecurity and informatization departments are to share reported information with relevant departments.
Data handlers conducting security assessment for important data sharing, trading, entrusted handling, or provision abroad, shall focus on assessing the following content:Where the assessment establishes that harm to national security, economic development, or the public interest is possible, data handlers may not share data, trade it, entrust its handling, or provide it abroad.
Article 33:Where data handlers share, trade, or entrust the handling of important data, they shall obtain consent from the districted city-level or higher competent department; where the competent department is not clear, they shall obtain consent from the districted city-level or higher cybersecurity and informatization department.
Article 34:Cloud computing services purchased by State bodies and critical information infrastructure operators shall undergo a security assessment organized by the national cybersecurity and informatization department together with relevant State Council departments.
Chapter V: Cross-Border Data Security ManagementArticle 35:Where data handlers need to provide data outside of the territory of the People’s Republic of China due to operational and other such requirements, they shall meet one of the following conditions:Where a data handler provides personal information of a concerned party abroad as required for concluding or fulfilling a contract where an individual is a concerned party, or personal information is provided abroad as necessary for protecting individuals’ lives or health, or the security of their property, an exception is made.
Article 36:Where data handlers provide personal information outside of the territory of the People’s Republic of China, they shall notify the individual about the name of the foreign data recipient, their contact method, the handling purpose, handling method, personal information categories, as well as methods for individuals to exercise their personal information rights with the foreign data recipient and other such matters, and obtain separate consent from the individual.
Where individuals’ consent has been obtained separately for personal information export at the time of personal information collection, and export takes place according to the matters for which consent has been obtained, it is not necessary to obtain the individual’s separate consent again.
Article 37:Where data handlers provide data collected or produced within the territory of the People’s Republic of China abroad, and the matter falls under the following circumstances, they shall undergo a data cross-border security assessment organized by the national cybersecurity and informatization department:Where laws, administrative regulations or the national cybersecurity and informatization department provide it is permitted to not conduct a security assessment, those provisions are followed.
Article 38:Where the People’s Republic of China has concluded or acceded to international treaties or agreements that contain provisions concerning the conditions for providing personal information outside of the territory of the People’s Republic of China, it is permitted to act according to those provisions.
Article 39:Data handlers shall fulfill the following duties when providing data abroad:Without the approval of the competent department of the People’s Republic of China, domestic individuals and organizations may not provide data stored within the territory of the People’s Republic of China to foreign judicial and law enforcement bodies.
Article 40:Data handlers providing personal information and important data abroad shall compile an outbound data transfer security report before January 31 of each year, and report the data export situation of the previous year to the districted city-level cybersecurity and informatization department:Article 41:The State establishes a cross-border data security gateway, to interrupt the transmission of information originating from outside the People’s Republic of China, of which laws and administrative regulations prohibit the dissemination or transmission.
No individual or organization may provide software, tools, lines (线路), etc., used to penetrate or circumvent the cross-border data security gateway; they may not provide Internet access, server contracting, technical support, dissemination and marketing, payment settlement, application download, and other such services for the penetration or circumvention of the cross-border data security gateway.
Where domestic users access the domestic network, their flow may not be routed abroad.
Article 42:Data handlers engaging in cross-border data activities shall, according to the supervision and management requirements for national cross-border data security supervision and management, establish and complete related technical and management measures.
Chapter VI: The Duties of Internet Platform OperatorsArticle 43:Internet platform operators shall establish data-related platform rules, privacy policies, and algorithmic policy disclosure systems; timely disclose decision procedures and voting procedures; and ensure that platform rules, privacy rules, and algorithms are fair and just.
When formulating platform rules or privacy policies or revising them in a way significantly affecting user rights and interests, Internet platform operators shall openly solicit opinions from society on their official website and the personal information protection–related sectoral association’s Internet platform. The opinion solicitation period may not be less than 30 working days, ensuring that users are able to conveniently and fully express their opinions. Internet platform operators shall fully adopt the public’s opinions, revise and perfect platform rules and privacy policies; and publish the opinion adoption situation in a manner easy for users to access, explaining the reasons for not adopting them, and accepting social supervision.
Where large-scale Internet platform operators with over 100 million daily active users formulate platform rules or privacy policies, or revise them in a manner significantly affecting the rights and interests of users, they shall undergo assessment by a third-party body recognized by the national cybersecurity and informatization department, and report the matter to the provincial-level or higher cybersecurity and informatization department and telecommunications competent department for approval.
Article 44:Internet platform operators shall bear data security management responsibility for third-party products and services connected to their platforms, determine the data security responsibilities and duties of third parties through contracts and other such forms, and supervise third parties to strengthen data security management and adopt the necessary data security protection measures.
Where third-party products and services generate harm to users, the user may require the Internet platform operator to pay compensation first.
The provisions of the previous two Paragraphs apply to the installation of third-party products on mobile telecommunications terminals.
Article 45:The State encourages Internet platform operators providing instant messaging services to provide users with the choice between personal messaging and non-personal messaging in terms of functional design. Personal messaging information is strictly protected according to personal information protection requirements; non-personal messaging information is managed according to provisions related to public information.
Article 46:Internet platform operators may not use data, platform rules, etc., to engage in the following activities:Article 47:Internet platform operators providing application program distribution services shall, according to the provisions of relevant laws and administrative regulations and the national cybersecurity and informatization department, establish and disclose application program examination and verification norms, and conduct security examination and verification of application software. Where application software does not conform to the provisions of laws and administrative regulations or the mandatory requirements of national standards, measures such as refusal to carry, supervised rectification, and stopping carrying shall be adopted.
Article 48:Where Internet platform operators provide instant messaging services to the public, they shall, according to the provisions of the State Council telecommunications managing department, provide data interfaces for instant messaging services of other Internet platform operators, supporting user data interconnection between different instant messaging services; without proper reason, it is not permitted to restrict users from accessing other Internet platforms as well as transmitting files to other Internet platforms.
Article 49:Where Internet platform operators use personal information and individualized push algorithms to provide information to users, they shall bear responsibility for the veracity and accuracy of the pushed information as well as the legality of the source, and conform to the following requirements:Article 50:The State establishes public service infrastructure for online identity verification, to provide individual identity verification public services according to the principles of government guidance and voluntary participation by netizens.
Internet platform operators shall support and give preference to using the national online identity verification public service infrastructure-provided personal information verification services.
Article 51:Where Internet platform operators provide services for State bodies, participating in the construction, maintenance, and management of public infrastructure or public service systems, the data collected or created in the process of using public resources to provide services may not be used for other purposes.
Article 52:Relevant State Council departments fulfilling statutory duties that need to obtain or access Internet platform operator-held public data or public information shall clarify the scope, categories, purpose, and basis for obtaining or accessing it, and are strictly limited to working within the scope of fulfilling their statutory duties; they may not use public data or public information they obtain or access for purposes other than fulfilling statutory duties.
Internet platform operators shall cooperate with relevant departments’ obtaining or accessing of public data or public information.
Article 53:Large-scale Internet platform operators shall, through retaining a third party for auditing, annually conduct an audit of the platform data security situation, the situation of platform rules and implementation of self-made commitments, the personal information protection situation, the data exploitation and use situation, etc., and disclose the auditing results.
Article 54:Internet platform operators using artificial intelligence, virtual reality, deep composites and other such new technologies to conduct data handling activities shall conduct a risk assessment according to relevant State provisions.
Chapter VII: Supervision and ManagementArticle 55:The national cybersecurity and informatization department is responsible for the comprehensive coordination of data security and related supervision and management work.
Public security bodies, national security bodies, etc., bear data security supervision and management duties and responsibilities within the scope of their respective duties and responsibilities.
Industry, telecommunications, transportation, finance, natural resources, healthcare, education, science and technology, and other such competent departments bear data security supervision and management duties and responsibilities within their sectors and their areas.
Competent departments shall determine data security protection work bodies and personnel for their sectors and their areas, and compile and organize the implementation of data security plans and data security incident emergency response plans for their sectors and their areas.
Competent departments shall regularly organize and conduct data security risk assessments for their sectors and their areas, conduct supervision and inspection of the situation of data handlers fulfilling data security protection duties, and guide and supervise data handlers in timely rectifying existing risks and vulnerabilities.
Article 56:The State is to establish and complete data security emergency response handling mechanisms, perfect cybersecurity emergency response plans and cybersecurity information sharing platforms, include data security incidents in national cybersecurity incident emergency response mechanisms, strengthen data security information sharing, data security risk and threat monitoring, and early warning, as well as data security incident emergency handling work.
Article 57:Relevant competent and supervision departments may adopt the following measures to conduct supervision and inspection of data security:Relevant competent and supervision departments conducting data security supervision and inspection shall be objective and fair; they may not obtain fees from the inspected work unit. Information obtained during the process of data security supervision and inspection can only be used as required to safeguard data security; it may not be used for other purposes.
Data handlers shall provide cooperation with competent and supervision departments’ data security supervision and inspection, including giving explanations and clarification regarding organizational operations, technical systems, algorithmic principles, data handling processes, etc.; open up security-related data for access; provide the necessary technical support; etc.
Article 58:The State establishes a data security audit system. Data handlers shall entrust specialized data security audit bodies with regularly conducting compliance audits of their handling of personal information compliance situation with laws and administrative regulations.
Competent and supervision departments are to organize and conduct audits of important data handling activities, focusing on auditing the situation of data handlers’ fulfilling duties provided in laws and administrative regulations, etc.
Article 59:The State supports related sectoral organizations to, according to their Charter, formulate behavioural norms for data security, strengthen sectoral self-discipline, and guide members in strengthening data security protection, raising data security protection levels, and stimulating the healthy development of the sector.
The State supports the establishment of sectoral organizations for personal information protection, conducting the following activities:Chapter VIII: Legal LiabilityArticle 60:Data handlers that fail to fulfill the provisions of Articles 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 or 18 shall be issued a warning and ordered to make corrections by relevant competent department and may be additionally fined between 50,000 and 500,000 RMB. The directly responsible person in charge and other responsible personnel may be fined between 10,000 RMB and 100,000 RMB. Data handlers that refuse to make corrections or cause data security endangerment or other serious consequences shall be fined between 500,000 RMB and 2 million RMB. The relevant competent department may order the suspension of related business activities, cessation of business for rectification, and cancellation of corresponding professional licenses or business permits. The directly responsible person in charge and other directly responsible personnel are to be fined between 50,000 and 200,000 RMB.
Article 61:Data handlers that fail to fulfill data security protection responsibilities under the provisions of Articles 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, and 25 shall be issued warnings, ordered to make corrections, and ordered by relevant departments to suspend or terminate the provision of services of applications that illegally handle personal information. Data handlers that refuse to make corrections shall be additionally fined no more than 1 million RMB. Directly responsible persons in charge and other personnel shall be fined between 10,000 RMB and 100,000 RMB.
Where the circumstances of the unlawful acts mentioned in the preceding Paragraph are grave, the relevant department shall order correction, confiscate illegal income, and impose a fine of a maximum of 50 million RMB or no greater than 5% of the previous year’s business volume (营业额). The relevant department may order the suspension of related business activities, cessation of the business for rectification and/or report to the relevant competent authorities for cancellation of relevant professional licenses or cancellation of business permits. Directly responsible persons in charge and other responsible persons may be fined between 100,000 RMB and 1 million RMB. Relevant departments may also decide to prohibit them from serving as directors, supervisors, senior managers, and/or personal information protection officers for relevant businesses for a certain period of time.
Article 62:Data handlers that fail to fulfil the data security protection responsibilities under the provisions of Articles 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, and 33 shall be issued warnings, ordered to make corrections, and ordered by relevant departments to suspend or terminate the provision of services of systems and applications that illegally handle important data. Data handlers that refuse to make a correction shall be additionally fined a maximum of 2 million RMB. The directly responsible person in charge and other directly responsible personnel shall be fined between 50,000 and 200,000 RMB.
Where the circumstances of the unlawful acts mentioned in the preceding Paragraph are grave, the relevant department shall order correction, confiscate illegal income, and impose a fine between 2 million and 5 million RMB. They may also order the suspension of related business activities, cessation of business for rectification, and/or report to the relevant competent department for cancellation of corresponding professional licenses or cancellation of business permits. Directly responsible persons in charge and other responsible personnel shall be fined between 200,000 and 1 million RMB.
Article 63:Critical information infrastructure operators that violate the provisions of Article 34 shall be ordered by relevant competent departments to make corrections and punished in accordance with relevant laws and administrative regulations.
Article 64:Data handlers who violate Articles 35, 36, 37, Article 39 Item 1, Article 40, or Article 42 shall be issued warnings, and ordered by relevant departments to make corrections and suspend outbound data transfer, and may additionally be fined between 100,000 and 1 million RMB. The directly responsible person in charge and other directly responsible personnel may be fined between 10,000 and 100,000 RMB. Where the circumstances are grave, a fine between 1 million and 10 million RMB may be imposed and the relevant department may order the suspension of related business activities, cessation of business for rectification, and/or cancellation of corresponding professional licenses or cancellation of business permits. The directly responsible person in charge and other directly responsible personnel may be fined between 100,000 and 1 million RMB.
Article 65:Data handlers that violate the provisions of Article 39 Item 2 of these Regulations and provide data to foriegn judicial or law enforcement agencies without approval of competent departments shall be given a warning by the relevant competent department and may additionally receive a penalty between 100,000 and 1 million RMB. Directly responsible persons in charge and other directly responsible personnel may be fined between 10,000 and 100,000 RMB. Where the consequences are grave, a fine between 1 million and 5 million RMB may be imposed and the relevant department may order the suspension of related business activities, cessation of business for rectification, and/or cancellation of corresponding professional licenses or cancellation of business permits. Directly responsible persons in charge and other directly responsible personnel may be fined between 50,000 and 500,000 RMB.
Article 66:Individuals and organizations that violate the provisions of Article 41 shall be issued warnings, ordered to make corrections, and have any illegal income confiscated by relevant competent departments. Individuals and organizations that refuse to make corrections shall be fined no less than one-times but no more than ten-times the amount of illegal income obtained. If no illegal gains are obtained, the directly responsible person in charge and other responsible personnel shall be fined between 50,000 and 500,000 RMB. Where the circumstances are serious, the relevant competent department in accordance with the law shall order the suspension of related business activities, cessation of business for rectification, and/or cancellation of corresponding professional licenses or cancellation of business permits. If the violation constitutes a crime, punishment shall be imposed in accordance with laws and administrative measures.
Article 67:Internet platform operators that violate the provisions of Article 43, Article 44, Article 45, Article 47, and Article 53 shall be issued warnings and ordered to make corrections by relevant departments. Operators that refuse to make corrections shall be fined between 500,000 and 5 million RMB. The directly responsible person in charge and other responsible personnel shall be fined between 50,000 and 500,000 RMB. Where the circumstances are grave, relevant departments may order the suspension of related business activities, cessation of business for rectification, and/or cancellation of corresponding professional licenses or cancellation of business permits.
Article 68:Internet platform operators that violate the provisions of Article 46, Article 48, and Article 51 shall be issued warnings and ordered to make corrections by relevant competent departments. Operators that refuse to make corrections shall be fined between 1% and 5% of gross business volume from the previous year. Where the circumstances are grave, the relevant competent department shall in accordance with relevant laws and administrative measures order the suspension of related business activities, cessation of business for rectification, and/or cancellation of corresponding professional licenses or cancellation of business permits. Violations that constitute crimes shall be punished in accordance with the relevant laws and administrative regulations.
Article 69:Internet platform operators that violate the provisions of Article 49 and Article 54 shall be warned and ordered by the relevant competent department to make corrections. Operators that refuse to make corrections shall be fined between 50,000 and 500,000 RMB. The directly responsible person in charge and other responsible personnel shall be fined between 10,000 to 100,000 RMB. Where the circumstances are grave, the relevant competent department may order the suspension of related business activities, cessation of business for rectification, and/or cancellation of corresponding professional licenses or cancellation of business permits.
Article 70:Data handlers that violate these Regulations and cause harm to others shall be civilly liable in accordance with law. Activities that constitute violations of public security management shall be given public security management penalties in accordance with the law. Activities that constitute crimes shall be investigated for criminal responsibility in accordance with the law.
Article 71:If a state organ does not fulfill its data security protection obligations under this measure, the higher-level body or department fulfilling data security management responsibilities shall order corrections. The directly responsible person in charge and other responsible personnel shall be punished in accordance with the law.
Article 72:Data handling activities conducted outside of the People’s Republic of China that harm national security, the public interest, or the legitimate rights and interests of individuals and organizations in the People's Republic of China shall be investigated for legal responsibility in accordance with the law.
Chapter IX: Supplementary ProvisionsArticle 73:The following terms used in this regulation are defined as follows:Article 74:Data handling activities involving the use of state secret information, core data, and encrypted data shall be implemented in accordance with relevant national provisions.
Article 75:These Regulations enter into force on [day, month, year].
CHINESE-LANGUAGE ORIGINAL国家互联网信息办公室关于《网络数据安全管理条例（征求意见稿）》公开征求意见的通知2021年11月14日 12:50 来源： 中国网信网为落实《中华人民共和国网络安全法》《中华人民共和国数据安全法》《中华人民共和国个人信息保护法》等法律关于数据安全管理的规定，规范网络数据处理活动，保护个人、组织在网络空间的合法权益，维护国家安全和公共利益，根据国务院2021年立法计划，我办会同相关部门研究起草《网络数据安全管理条例（征求意见稿）》，现向社会公开征求意见。公众可通过以下途径和方式反馈意见：1.通过电子邮件将意见发送至：shujuju@cac.gov.cn。2.通过信函将意见寄至：北京市西城区车公庄大街11号国家互联网信息办公室网络数据管理局，邮编：100044，并在信封上注明“网络数据安全管理条例征求意见”。意见反馈截止时间为2021年12月13日。附件：《网络数据安全管理条例（征求意见稿）》国家互联网信息办公室2021年11月14日网络数据安全管理条例（征求意见稿）第一章 总则第一条 为了规范网络数据处理活动，保障数据安全，保护个人、组织在网络空间的合法权益，维护国家安全、公共利益，根据《中华人民共和国网络安全法》《中华人民共和国数据安全法》《中华人民共和国个人信息保护法》等法律，制定本条例。第二条 在中华人民共和国境内利用网络开展数据处理活动，以及网络数据安全的监督管理，适用本条例。在中华人民共和国境外处理中华人民共和国境内个人和组织数据的活动，有下列情形之一的，适用本条例：（一）以向境内提供产品或者服务为目的；（二）分析、评估境内个人、组织的行为；（三）涉及境内重要数据处理；（四）法律、行政法规规定的其他情形。自然人因个人或者家庭事务开展数据处理活动，不适用本条例。第三条 国家统筹发展和安全，坚持促进数据开发利用与保障数据安全并重，加强数据安全防护能力建设，保障数据依法有序自由流动，促进数据依法合理有效利用。第四条 国家支持数据开发利用与安全保护相关的技术、产品、服务创新和人才培养。国家鼓励国家机关、行业组织、企业、教育和科研机构、有关专业机构等开展数据开发利用和安全保护合作，开展数据安全宣传教育和培训。第五条 国家建立数据分类分级保护制度。按照数据对国家安全、公共利益或者个人、组织合法权益的影响和重要程度，将数据分为一般数据、重要数据、核心数据，不同级别的数据采取不同的保护措施。国家对个人信息和重要数据进行重点保护，对核心数据实行严格保护。各地区、各部门应当按照国家数据分类分级要求，对本地区、本部门以及相关行业、领域的数据进行分类分级管理。第六条 数据处理者对所处理数据的安全负责，履行数据安全保护义务，接受政府和社会监督，承担社会责任。数据处理者应当按照有关法律、行政法规的规定和国家标准的强制性要求，建立完善数据安全管理制度和技术保护机制。第七条 国家推动公共数据开放、共享，促进数据开发利用，并依法对公共数据实施监督管理。国家建立健全数据交易管理制度，明确数据交易机构设立、运行标准，规范数据流通交易行为，确保数据依法有序流通。第二章 一般规定第八条 任何个人和组织开展数据处理活动应当遵守法律、行政法规，尊重社会公德和伦理，不得从事以下活动：（一）危害国家安全、荣誉和利益，泄露国家秘密和工作秘密；（二）侵害他人名誉权、隐私权、著作权和其他合法权益等；（三）通过窃取或者以其他非法方式获取数据；（四）非法出售或者非法向他人提供数据；（五）制作、发布、复制、传播违法信息；（六）法律、行政法规禁止的其他行为。任何个人和组织知道或者应当知道他人从事前款活动的，不得为其提供技术支持、工具、程序和广告推广、支付结算等服务。第九条 数据处理者应当采取备份、加密、访问控制等必要措施，保障数据免遭泄露、窃取、篡改、毁损、丢失、非法使用，应对数据安全事件，防范针对和利用数据的违法犯罪活动，维护数据的完整性、保密性、可用性。数据处理者应当按照网络安全等级保护的要求，加强数据处理系统、数据传输网络、数据存储环境等安全防护，处理重要数据的系统原则上应当满足三级以上网络安全等级保护和关键信息基础设施安全保护要求，处理核心数据的系统依照有关规定从严保护。数据处理者应当使用密码对重要数据和核心数据进行保护。第十条 数据处理者发现其使用或者提供的网络产品和服务存在安全缺陷、漏洞，或者威胁国家安全、危害公共利益等风险时，应当立即采取补救措施。第十一条 数据处理者应当建立数据安全应急处置机制，发生数据安全事件时及时启动应急响应机制，采取措施防止危害扩大，消除安全隐患。安全事件对个人、组织造成危害的，数据处理者应当在三个工作日内将安全事件和风险情况、危害后果、已经采取的补救措施等以电话、短信、即时通信工具、电子邮件等方式通知利害关系人，无法通知的可采取公告方式告知，法律、行政法规规定可以不通知的从其规定。安全事件涉嫌犯罪的，数据处理者应当按规定向公安机关报案。发生重要数据或者十万人以上个人信息泄露、毁损、丢失等数据安全事件时，数据处理者还应当履行以下义务：（一）在发生安全事件的八小时内向设区的市级网信部门和有关主管部门报告事件基本信息，包括涉及的数据数量、类型、可能的影响、已经或拟采取的处置措施等；（二）在事件处置完毕后五个工作日内向设区的市级网信部门和有关主管部门报告包括事件原因、危害后果、责任处理、改进措施等情况的调查评估报告。第十二条 数据处理者向第三方提供个人信息，或者共享、交易、委托处理重要数据的，应当遵守以下规定：（一）向个人告知提供个人信息的目的、类型、方式、范围、存储期限、存储地点，并取得个人单独同意，符合法律、行政法规规定的不需要取得个人同意的情形或者经过匿名化处理的除外；（二）与数据接收方约定处理数据的目的、范围、处理方式，数据安全保护措施等，通过合同等形式明确双方的数据安全责任义务，并对数据接收方的数据处理活动进行监督；（三）留存个人同意记录及提供个人信息的日志记录，共享、交易、委托处理重要数据的审批记录、日志记录至少五年。数据接收方应当履行约定的义务，不得超出约定的目的、范围、处理方式处理个人信息和重要数据。第十三条 数据处理者开展以下活动，应当按照国家有关规定，申报网络安全审查：（一）汇聚掌握大量关系国家安全、经济发展、公共利益的数据资源的互联网平台运营者实施合并、重组、分立，影响或者可能影响国家安全的；（二）处理一百万人以上个人信息的数据处理者赴国外上市的；（三）数据处理者赴香港上市，影响或者可能影响国家安全的；（四）其他影响或者可能影响国家安全的数据处理活动。大型互联网平台运营者在境外设立总部或者运营中心、研发中心，应当向国家网信部门和主管部门报告。第十四条 数据处理者发生合并、重组、分立等情况的，数据接收方应当继续履行数据安全保护义务，涉及重要数据和一百万人以上个人信息的，应当向设区的市级主管部门报告；数据处理者发生解散、被宣告破产等情况的，应当向设区的市级主管部门报告，按照相关要求移交或删除数据，主管部门不明确的，应当向设区的市级网信部门报告。第十五条 数据处理者从其他途径获取的数据，应当按照本条例的规定履行数据安全保护义务。第十六条 国家机关应当依照法律、行政法规的规定和国家标准的强制性要求，建立健全数据安全管理制度，落实数据安全保护责任，保障政务数据安全。第十七条 数据处理者在采用自动化工具访问、收集数据时，应当评估对网络服务的性能、功能带来的影响，不得干扰网络服务的正常功能。自动化工具访问、收集数据违反法律、行政法规或者行业自律公约、影响网络服务正常功能，或者侵犯他人知识产权等合法权益的，数据处理者应当停止访问、收集数据行为并采取相应补救措施。第十八条 数据处理者应当建立便捷的数据安全投诉举报渠道，及时受理、处置数据安全投诉举报。数据处理者应当公布接受投诉、举报的联系方式、责任人信息，每年公开披露受理和收到的个人信息安全投诉数量、投诉处理情况、平均处理时间情况，接受社会监督。第三章 个人信息保护第十九条 数据处理者处理个人信息，应当具有明确、合理的目的，遵循合法、正当、必要的原则。基于个人同意处理个人信息的，应当满足以下要求：（一）处理的个人信息是提供服务所必需的，或者是履行法律、行政法规规定的义务所必需的；（二）限于实现处理目的最短周期、最低频次，采取对个人权益影响最小的方式；（三）不得因个人拒绝提供服务必需的个人信息以外的信息，拒绝提供服务或者干扰个人正常使用服务。第二十条 数据处理者处理个人信息，应当制定个人信息处理规则并严格遵守。个人信息处理规则应当集中公开展示、易于访问并置于醒目位置，内容明确具体、简明通俗，系统全面地向个人说明个人信息处理情况。个人信息处理规则应当包括但不限于以下内容：（一）依据产品或者服务的功能明确所需的个人信息，以清单形式列明每项功能处理个人信息的目的、用途、方式、种类、频次或者时机、保存地点等，以及拒绝处理个人信息对个人的影响；（二）个人信息存储期限或者个人信息存储期限的确定方法、到期后的处理方式；（三）个人查阅、复制、更正、删除、限制处理、转移个人信息，以及注销账号、撤回处理个人信息同意的途径和方法；（四）以集中展示等便利用户访问的方式说明产品服务中嵌入的所有收集个人信息的第三方代码、插件的名称，以及每个第三方代码、插件收集个人信息的目的、方式、种类、频次或者时机及其个人信息处理规则；（五）向第三方提供个人信息情形及其目的、方式、种类，数据接收方相关信息等；（六）个人信息安全风险及保护措施；（七）个人信息安全问题的投诉、举报渠道及解决途径，个人信息保护负责人联系方式。第二十一条 处理个人信息应当取得个人同意的，数据处理者应当遵守以下规定：（一）按照服务类型分别向个人申请处理个人信息的同意，不得使用概括性条款取得同意；（二）处理个人生物识别、宗教信仰、特定身份、医疗健康、金融账户、行踪轨迹等敏感个人信息应当取得个人单独同意；（三）处理不满十四周岁未成年人的个人信息，应当取得其监护人同意；（四）不得以改善服务质量、提升用户体验、研发新产品等为由，强迫个人同意处理其个人信息；（五）不得通过误导、欺诈、胁迫等方式获得个人的同意；（六）不得通过捆绑不同类型服务、批量申请同意等方式诱导、强迫个人进行批量个人信息同意；（七）不得超出个人授权同意的范围处理个人信息；（八）不得在个人明确表示不同意后，频繁征求同意、干扰正常使用服务。个人信息的处理目的、处理方式和处理的个人信息种类发生变更的，数据处理者应当重新取得个人同意，并同步修改个人信息处理规则。对个人同意行为有效性存在争议的，数据处理者负有举证责任。第二十二条 有下列情况之一的，数据处理者应当在十五个工作日内删除个人信息或者进行匿名化处理：（一）已实现个人信息处理目的或者实现处理目的不再必要；（二）达到与用户约定或者个人信息处理规则明确的存储期限；（三）终止服务或者个人注销账号；（四）因使用自动化采集技术等，无法避免采集到的非必要个人信息或者未经个人同意的个人信息。删除个人信息从技术上难以实现，或者因业务复杂等原因，在十五个工作日内删除个人信息确有困难的，数据处理者不得开展除存储和采取必要的安全保护措施之外的处理，并应当向个人作出合理解释。法律、行政法规另有规定的从其规定。第二十三条 个人提出查阅、复制、更正、补充、限制处理、删除其个人信息的合理请求的，数据处理者应当履行以下义务：（一）提供便捷的支持个人结构化查询本人被收集的个人信息类型、数量等的方法和途径，不得以时间、位置等因素对个人的合理请求进行限制；（二）提供便捷的支持个人复制、更正、补充、限制处理、删除其个人信息、撤回授权同意以及注销账号的功能，且不得设置不合理条件；（三）收到个人复制、更正、补充、限制处理、删除本人个人信息、撤回授权同意或者注销账号申请的，应当在十五个工作日内处理并反馈。法律、行政法规另有规定的从其规定。第二十四条 符合下列条件的个人信息转移请求，数据处理者应当为个人指定的其他数据处理者访问、获取其个人信息提供转移服务：（一）请求转移的个人信息是基于同意或者订立、履行合同所必需而收集的个人信息；（二）请求转移的个人信息是本人信息或者请求人合法获得且不违背他人意愿的他人信息；（三）能够验证请求人的合法身份。数据处理者发现接收个人信息的其他数据处理者有非法处理个人信息风险的，应当对个人信息转移请求做合理的风险提示。请求转移个人信息次数明显超出合理范围的，数据处理者可以收取合理费用。第二十五条 数据处理者利用生物特征进行个人身份认证的，应当对必要性、安全性进行风险评估，不得将人脸、步态、指纹、虹膜、声纹等生物特征作为唯一的个人身份认证方式，以强制个人同意收集其个人生物特征信息。法律、行政法规另有规定的从其规定。第二十六条 数据处理者处理一百万人以上个人信息的，还应当遵守本条例第四章对重要数据的处理者作出的规定。第四章 重要数据安全第二十七条 各地区、各部门按照国家有关要求和标准，组织本地区、本部门以及相关行业、领域的数据处理者识别重要数据和核心数据，组织制定本地区、本部门以及相关行业、领域重要数据和核心数据目录，并报国家网信部门。第二十八条 重要数据的处理者，应当明确数据安全负责人，成立数据安全管理机构。数据安全管理机构在数据安全负责人的领导下，履行以下职责：（一）研究提出数据安全相关重大决策建议；（二）制定实施数据安全保护计划和数据安全事件应急预案；（三）开展数据安全风险监测，及时处置数据安全风险和事件；（四）定期组织开展数据安全宣传教育培训、风险评估、应急演练等活动；（五）受理、处置数据安全投诉、举报；（六）按照要求及时向网信部门和主管、监管部门报告数据安全情况。数据安全负责人应当具备数据安全专业知识和相关管理工作经历，由数据处理者决策层成员承担，有权直接向网信部门和主管、监管部门反映数据安全情况。第二十九条 重要数据的处理者，应当在识别其重要数据后的十五个工作日内向设区的市级网信部门备案，备案内容包括：（一）数据处理者基本信息，数据安全管理机构信息、数据安全负责人姓名和联系方式等；（二）处理数据的目的、规模、方式、范围、类型、存储期限、存储地点等，不包括数据内容本身；（三）国家网信部门和主管、监管部门规定的其他备案内容。处理数据的目的、范围、类型及数据安全防护措施等有重大变化的，应当重新备案。依据部门职责分工，网信部门与有关部门共享备案信息。第三十条 重要数据的处理者，应当制定数据安全培训计划，每年组织开展全员数据安全教育培训，数据安全相关的技术和管理人员每年教育培训时间不得少于二十小时。第三十一条 重要数据的处理者，应当优先采购安全可信的网络产品和服务。第三十二条 处理重要数据或者赴境外上市的数据处理者，应当自行或者委托数据安全服务机构每年开展一次数据安全评估，并在每年1月31日前将上一年度数据安全评估报告报设区的市级网信部门，年度数据安全评估报告的内容包括：（一）处理重要数据的情况；（二）发现的数据安全风险及处置措施；（三）数据安全管理制度，数据备份、加密、访问控制等安全防护措施，以及管理制度实施情况和防护措施的有效性；（四）落实国家数据安全法律、行政法规和标准情况；（五）发生的数据安全事件及其处置情况；（六）共享、交易、委托处理、向境外提供重要数据的安全评估情况；（七）数据安全相关的投诉及处理情况；（八）国家网信部门和主管、监管部门明确的其他数据安全情况。数据处理者应当保留风险评估报告至少三年。依据部门职责分工，网信部门与有关部门共享报告信息。数据处理者开展共享、交易、委托处理、向境外提供重要数据的安全评估，应当重点评估以下内容：（一）共享、交易、委托处理、向境外提供数据，以及数据接收方处理数据的目的、方式、范围等是否合法、正当、必要；（二）共享、交易、委托处理、向境外提供数据被泄露、毁损、篡改、滥用的风险，以及对国家安全、经济发展、公共利益带来的风险；（三）数据接收方的诚信状况、守法情况、境外政府机构合作关系、是否被中国政府制裁等背景情况，承诺承担的责任以及履行责任的能力等是否能够有效保障数据安全；（四）与数据接收方订立的相关合同中关于数据安全的要求能否有效约束数据接收方履行数据安全保护义务；（五）在数据处理过程中的管理和技术措施等是否能够防范数据泄露、毁损等风险。评估认为可能危害国家安全、经济发展和公共利益，数据处理者不得共享、交易、委托处理、向境外提供数据。第三十三条 数据处理者共享、交易、委托处理重要数据的，应当征得设区的市级及以上主管部门同意，主管部门不明确的，应当征得设区的市级及以上网信部门同意。第三十四条 国家机关和关键信息基础设施运营者采购的云计算服务，应当通过国家网信部门会同国务院有关部门组织的安全评估。第五章 数据跨境安全管理第三十五条 数据处理者因业务等需要，确需向中华人民共和国境外提供数据的，应当具备下列条件之一：（一）通过国家网信部门组织的数据出境安全评估；（二）数据处理者和数据接收方均通过国家网信部门认定的专业机构进行的个人信息保护认证；（三）按照国家网信部门制定的关于标准合同的规定与境外数据接收方订立合同，约定双方权利和义务；（四）法律、行政法规或者国家网信部门规定的其他条件。数据处理者为订立、履行个人作为一方当事人的合同所必需向境外提供当事人个人信息的，或者为了保护个人生命健康和财产安全而必须向境外提供个人信息的除外。第三十六条 数据处理者向中华人民共和国境外提供个人信息的，应当向个人告知境外数据接收方的名称、联系方式、处理目的、处理方式、个人信息的种类以及个人向境外数据接收方行使个人信息权利的方式等事项，并取得个人的单独同意。收集个人信息时已单独就个人信息出境取得个人同意，且按照取得同意的事项出境的，无需再次取得个人单独同意。第三十七条 数据处理者向境外提供在中华人民共和国境内收集和产生的数据，属于以下情形的，应当通过国家网信部门组织的数据出境安全评估：（一）出境数据中包含重要数据；（二）关键信息基础设施运营者和处理一百万人以上个人信息的数据处理者向境外提供个人信息；（三）国家网信部门规定的其它情形。法律、行政法规和国家网信部门规定可以不进行安全评估的，从其规定。第三十八条 中华人民共和国缔结或者参加的国际条约、协定对向中华人民共和国境外提供个人信息的条件等有规定的，可以按照其规定执行。第三十九条 数据处理者向境外提供数据应当履行以下义务：（一）不得超出报送网信部门的个人信息保护影响评估报告中明确的目的、范围、方式和数据类型、规模等向境外提供个人信息；（二）不得超出网信部门安全评估时明确的出境目的、范围、方式和数据类型、规模等向境外提供个人信息和重要数据；（三）采取合同等有效措施监督数据接收方按照双方约定的目的、范围、方式使用数据，履行数据安全保护义务，保证数据安全；（四）接受和处理数据出境所涉及的用户投诉；（五）数据出境对个人、组织合法权益或者公共利益造成损害的，数据处理者应当依法承担责任；（六）存留相关日志记录和数据出境审批记录三年以上；（七）国家网信部门会同国务院有关部门核验向境外提供个人信息和重要数据的类型、范围时，数据处理者应当以明文、可读方式予以展示；（八）国家网信部门认定不得出境的，数据处理者应当停止数据出境，并采取有效措施对已出境数据的安全予以补救；（九）个人信息出境后确需再转移的，应当事先与个人约定再转移的条件，并明确数据接收方履行的安全保护义务。非经中华人民共和国主管机关批准，境内的个人、组织不得向外国司法或者执法机构提供存储于中华人民共和国境内的数据。第四十条 向境外提供个人信息和重要数据的数据处理者，应当在每年1月31日前编制数据出境安全报告，向设区的市级网信部门报告上一年度以下数据出境情况：（一）全部数据接收方名称、联系方式；（二）出境数据的类型、数量及目的；（三）数据在境外的存放地点、存储期限、使用范围和方式；（四）涉及向境外提供数据的用户投诉及处理情况；（五）发生的数据安全事件及其处置情况；（六）数据出境后再转移的情况；（七）国家网信部门明确向境外提供数据需要报告的其他事项。第四十一条 国家建立数据跨境安全网关，对来源于中华人民共和国境外、法律和行政法规禁止发布或者传输的信息予以阻断传播。任何个人和组织不得提供用于穿透、绕过数据跨境安全网关的程序、工具、线路等，不得为穿透、绕过数据跨境安全网关提供互联网接入、服务器托管、技术支持、传播推广、支付结算、应用下载等服务。境内用户访问境内网络的，其流量不得被路由至境外。第四十二条 数据处理者从事跨境数据活动应当按照国家数据跨境安全监管要求，建立健全相关技术和管理措施。第六章 互联网平台运营者义务第四十三条 互联网平台运营者应当建立与数据相关的平台规则、隐私政策和算法策略披露制度，及时披露制定程序、裁决程序，保障平台规则、隐私政策、算法公平公正。平台规则、隐私政策制定或者对用户权益有重大影响的修订，互联网平台运营者应当在其官方网站、个人信息保护相关行业协会互联网平台面向社会公开征求意见，征求意见时长不得少于三十个工作日，确保用户能够便捷充分表达意见。互联网平台运营者应当充分采纳公众意见，修改完善平台规则、隐私政策，并以易于用户访问的方式公布意见采纳情况，说明未采纳的理由，接受社会监督。日活用户超过一亿的大型互联网平台运营者平台规则、隐私政策制定或者对用户权益有重大影响的修订的，应当经国家网信部门认定的第三方机构评估，并报省级及以上网信部门和电信主管部门同意。第四十四条 互联网平台运营者应当对接入其平台的第三方产品和服务承担数据安全管理责任，通过合同等形式明确第三方的数据安全责任义务，并督促第三方加强数据安全管理，采取必要的数据安全保护措施。第三方产品和服务对用户造成损害的，用户可以要求互联网平台运营者先行赔偿。移动通信终端预装第三方产品适用本条前两款规定。第四十五条 国家鼓励提供即时通信服务的互联网平台运营者从功能设计上为用户提供个人通信和非个人通信选择。个人通信的信息按照个人信息保护要求严格保护，非个人通信的信息按照公共信息有关规定进行管理。第四十六条 互联网平台运营者不得利用数据以及平台规则等从事以下活动：（一）利用平台收集掌握的用户数据，无正当理由对交易条件相同的用户实施产品和服务差异化定价等损害用户合法利益的行为；（二）利用平台收集掌握的经营者数据，在产品推广中实行最低价销售等损害公平竞争的行为；（三）利用数据误导、欺诈、胁迫用户，损害用户对其数据被处理的决定权，违背用户意愿处理用户数据；（四）在平台规则、算法、技术、流量分配等方面设置不合理的限制和障碍，限制平台上的中小企业公平获取平台产生的行业、市场数据等，阻碍市场创新。第四十七条 提供应用程序分发服务的互联网平台运营者，应当按照有关法律、行政法规和国家网信部门的规定，建立、披露应用程序审核规则，并对应用程序进行安全审核。对不符合法律、行政法规的规定和国家标准的强制性要求的应用程序，应当采取拒绝上架、督促整改、下架处置等措施。第四十八条 互联网平台运营者面向公众提供即时通信服务的，应当按照国务院电信主管部门的规定，为其他互联网平台运营者的即时通信服务提供数据接口，支持不同即时通信服务之间用户数据互通，无正当理由不得限制用户访问其他互联网平台以及向其他互联网平台传输文件。第四十九条 互联网平台运营者利用个人信息和个性化推送算法向用户提供信息的，应当对推送信息的真实性、准确性以及来源合法性负责，并符合以下要求：（一）收集个人信息用于个性化推荐时，应当取得个人单独同意；（二）设置易于理解、便于访问和操作的一键关闭个性化推荐选项，允许用户拒绝接受定向推送信息，允许用户重置、修改、调整针对其个人特征的定向推送参数；（三）允许个人删除定向推送信息服务收集产生的个人信息，法律、行政法规另有规定或者与用户另有约定的除外。第五十条 国家建设网络身份认证公共服务基础设施，按照政府引导、网民自愿原则，提供个人身份认证公共服务。互联网平台运营者应当支持并优先使用国家网络身份认证公共服务基础设施提供的个人身份认证服务。第五十一条 互联网平台运营者在为国家机关提供服务，参与公共基础设施、公共服务系统建设运维管理，利用公共资源提供服务过程中收集、产生的数据不得用于其他用途。第五十二条 国务院有关部门履行法定职责需要调取或者访问互联网平台运营者掌握的公共数据、公共信息，应当明确调取或者访问的范围、类型、用途、依据，严格限定在履行法定职责范围内，不得将调取或者访问的公共数据、公共信息用于履行法定职责之外的目的。互联网平台运营者应当对有关部门调取或者访问公共数据、公共信息予以配合。第五十三条 大型互联网平台运营者应当通过委托第三方审计方式，每年对平台数据安全情况、平台规则和自身承诺的执行情况、个人信息保护情况、数据开发利用情况等进行年度审计，并披露审计结果。第五十四条 互联网平台运营者利用人工智能、虚拟现实、深度合成等新技术开展数据处理活动的，应当按照国家有关规定进行安全评估。第七章 监督管理第五十五条 国家网信部门负责统筹协调数据安全和相关监督管理工作。公安机关、国家安全机关等在各自职责范围内承担数据安全监管职责。工业、电信、交通、金融、自然资源、卫生健康、教育、科技等主管部门承担本行业、本领域数据安全监管职责。主管部门应当明确本行业、本领域数据安全保护工作机构和人员，编制并组织实施本行业、本领域的数据安全规划和数据安全事件应急预案。主管部门应当定期组织开展本行业、本领域的数据安全风险评估，对数据处理者履行数据安全保护义务情况进行监督检查，指导督促数据处理者及时对存在的风险隐患进行整改。第五十六条 国家建立健全数据安全应急处置机制，完善网络安全事件应急预案和网络安全信息共享平台，将数据安全事件纳入国家网络安全事件应急响应机制，加强数据安全信息共享、数据安全风险和威胁监测预警以及数据安全事件应急处置工作。第五十七条 有关主管、监管部门可以采取以下措施对数据安全进行监督检查：（一）要求数据处理者相关人员就监督检查事项作出说明；（二）查阅、调取与数据安全有关的文档、记录；（三）按照规定程序，利用检测工具或者委托专业机构对数据安全措施运行情况进行技术检测；（四）核验数据出境类型、范围等；（五）法律、行政法规、规章规定的其他必要方式。有关主管、监管部门开展数据安全监督检查，应当客观公正，不得向被检查单位收取费用。在数据安全监督检查中获取的信息只能用于维护数据安全的需要，不得用于其他用途。数据处理者应当对有关主管、监管部门的数据安全监督检查予以配合，包括对组织运作、技术系统、算法原理、数据处理程序等进行解释说明，开放安全相关数据访问、提供必要技术支持等。第五十八条 国家建立数据安全审计制度。数据处理者应当委托数据安全审计专业机构定期对其处理个人信息遵守法律、行政法规的情况进行合规审计。主管、监管部门组织开展对重要数据处理活动的审计，重点审计数据处理者履行法律、行政法规规定的义务等情况。第五十九条 国家支持相关行业组织按照章程，制定数据安全行为规范，加强行业自律，指导会员加强数据安全保护，提高数据安全保护水平，促进行业健康发展。国家支持成立个人信息保护行业组织，开展以下活动：（一）接受个人信息保护投诉举报并进行调查、调解；（二）向个人提供信息和咨询服务，支持个人依法对损害个人信息权益的行为提起诉讼；（三）曝光损害个人信息权益的行为，对个人信息保护开展社会监督；（四）向有关部门反映个人信息保护情况、提供咨询、建议；（五）违法处理个人信息、侵害众多个人的权益的行为，依法向人民法院提起诉讼。第八章 法律责任第六十条 数据处理者不履行第九条、第十条、第十一条、第十二条、第十三条、第十四条、第十五条、第十八条的规定，由有关主管部门责令改正，给予警告，可以并处五万元以上五十万元以下罚款，对直接负责的主管人员和其他直接责任人员可以处一万元以上十万元以下罚款；拒不改正或者导致危害数据安全等严重后果的，处五十万元以上二百万元以下罚款，并可以责令暂停相关业务、停业整顿、吊销相关业务许可证或者吊销营业执照，对直接负责的主管人员和其他直接责任人员处五万元以上二十万元以下罚款。第六十一条 数据处理者不履行第十九条、第二十条、第二十一条、第二十二条、第二十三条、第二十四条、第二十五条规定的数据安全保护义务的，由有关部门责令改正，给予警告，没收违法所得，对违法处理个人信息的应用程序，责令暂停或者终止提供服务；拒不改正的，并处一百万元以下罚款；对直接负责的主管人员和其他直接责任人员处一万元以上十万元以下罚款。有前款规定的违法行为，情节严重的，由有关部门责令改正，没收违法所得，并处五千万元以下或者上一年度营业额百分之五以下罚款，并可以责令暂停相关业务或者停业整顿、通报有关主管部门吊销相关业务许可证或者吊销营业执照；对直接负责的主管人员和其他直接责任人员处十万元以上一百万元以下罚款，并可以决定禁止其在一定期限内担任相关企业的董事、监事、高级管理人员和个人信息保护负责人。第六十二条 数据处理者不履行第二十八条、第二十九条、第三十条、第三十一条、第三十二条、第三十三条规定的数据安全保护义务的，由有关部门责令改正，给予警告，对违法处理重要数据的系统及应用，责令暂停或者终止提供服务；拒不改正的，并处二百万元以下罚款，对直接负责的主管人员和其他直接责任人员处五万元以上二十万元以下罚款。有前款规定的违法行为，情节严重的，由有关部门责令改正，没收违法所得，并处二百万元以上五百万元以下罚款，并可以责令暂停相关业务或者停业整顿、通报有关主管部门吊销相关业务许可证或者吊销营业执照；对直接负责的主管人员和其他直接责任人员处二十万元以上一百万元以下罚款。第六十三条 关键信息基础设施运营者违反第三十四条的规定，由有关部门责令改正，依照有关法律、行政法规的规定予以处罚。第六十四条 数据处理者违反第三十五条、第三十六条、第三十七条、第三十九条第一款、第四十条、第四十二条的规定，由有关部门责令改正，给予警告，暂停数据出境，可以并处十万元以上一百万元以下罚款，对直接负责的主管人员和其他直接责任人员可以处一万元以上十万元以下罚款；情节严重的，处一百万元以上一千万元以下罚款，并可以责令暂停相关业务、停业整顿、吊销相关业务许可证或者吊销营业执照，对直接负责的主管人员和其他直接责任人员处十万元以上一百万元以下罚款。第六十五条 违反本条例第三十九条第二款的规定，未经主管机关批准向外国司法或者执法机构提供数据的，由有关主管部门给予警告，可以并处十万元以上一百万元以下罚款，对直接负责的主管人员和其他直接责任人员可以处一万元以上十万元以下罚款；造成严重后果的，处一百万元以上五百万元以下罚款，并可以责令暂停相关业务、停业整顿、吊销相关业务许可证或者吊销营业执照，对直接负责的主管人员和其他直接责任人员处五万元以上五十万元以下罚款。第六十六条 个人和组织违反第四十一条的规定，由有关主管部门责令改正，给予警告、没收违法所得；拒不改正的，处违法所得一倍以上十倍以下的罚款，没有违法所得的，对直接负责的主管人员和其他直接负责人员，处五万元以上五十万元以下罚款；情节严重的，由有关主管部门依照相关法律、行政法规的规定，责令其暂停相关业务、停业整顿、吊销相关业务许可证或者吊销营业执照；构成犯罪的，依照相关法律、行政法规的规定处罚。第六十七条 互联网平台运营者违反第四十三条、第四十四条、第四十五条、第四十七条、第五十三条的规定，由有关部门责令改正，予以警告；拒不改正，处五十万元以上五百万元以下罚款，对直接负责的主管人员和其他直接负责人员，处五万元以上五十万元以下罚款；情节严重的，可以责令暂停相关业务、停业整顿、关闭网站、吊销相关业务许可证或者吊销营业执照。第六十八条 互联网平台运营者违反第四十六条、第四十八条、第五十一条的规定，由有关主管部门责令改正，给予警告；拒不改正的，处上一年度销售额百分之一以上百分之五以下的罚款；情节严重的，由有关主管部门依照相关法律、行政法规的规定，责令其暂停相关业务、停业整顿、吊销相关业务许可证或者吊销营业执照；构成犯罪的，依照相关法律、行政法规的规定处罚。第六十九条 互联网平台运营者违反第四十九条、第五十四条的规定，由有关主管部门责令改正，予以警告；拒不改正，处五万元以上五十万元以下罚款，对直接负责的主管人员和其他直接责任人员处一万元以上十万元以下罚款；情节严重的，可由有关主管部门责令暂停相关业务、停业整顿、关闭网站、吊销相关业务许可证或者吊销营业执照。第七十条 数据处理者违反本条例规定，给他人造成损害的，依法承担民事责任；构成违反治安管理行为的，依法给予治安管理处罚；构成犯罪的，依法追究刑事责任。第七十一条 国家机关不履行本法规定的数据安全保护义务的，由其上级机关或者履行数据安全管理职责的部门责令改正；对直接负责的主管人员和其他直接责任人员依法给予处分。第七十二条 在中华人民共和国境外开展数据处理活动，损害中华人民共和国国家安全、公共利益或者公民、组织合法权益的，依法追究法律责任。第九章 附则第七十三条 本条例下列用语的含义：（一）网络数据（简称数据）是指任何以电子方式对信息的记录。（二）数据处理活动是指数据收集、存储、使用、加工、传输、提供、公开、删除等活动。（三）重要数据是指一旦遭到篡改、破坏、泄露或者非法获取、非法利用，可能危害国家安全、公共利益的数据。包括以下数据：1.未公开的政务数据、工作秘密、情报数据和执法司法数据；2.出口管制数据，出口管制物项涉及的核心技术、设计方案、生产工艺等相关的数据，密码、生物、电子信息、人工智能等领域对国家安全、经济竞争实力有直接影响的科学技术成果数据；3.国家法律、行政法规、部门规章明确规定需要保护或者控制传播的国家经济运行数据、重要行业业务数据、统计数据等；4.工业、电信、能源、交通、水利、金融、国防科技工业、海关、税务等重点行业和领域安全生产、运行的数据，关键系统组件、设备供应链数据；5.达到国家有关部门规定的规模或者精度的基因、地理、矿产、气象等人口与健康、自然资源与环境国家基础数据；6.国家基础设施、关键信息基础设施建设运行及其安全数据，国防设施、军事管理区、国防科研生产单位等重要敏感区域的地理位置、安保情况等数据；7.其他可能影响国家政治、国土、军事、经济、文化、社会、科技、生态、资源、核设施、海外利益、生物、太空、极地、深海等安全的数据。（四）核心数据是指关系国家安全、国民经济命脉、重要民生和重大公共利益等的数据。（五）数据处理者是指在数据处理活动中自主决定处理目的和处理方式的个人和组织。（六）公共数据是指国家机关和法律、行政法规授权的具有管理公共事务职能的组织履行公共管理职责或者提供公共服务过程中收集、产生的各类数据，以及其他组织在提供公共服务中收集、产生的涉及公共利益的各类数据。（七）委托处理是指数据处理者委托第三方按照约定的目的和方式开展的数据处理活动。（八）单独同意是指数据处理者在开展具体数据处理活动时，对每项个人信息取得个人同意，不包括一次性针对多项个人信息、多种处理活动的同意。（九）互联网平台运营者是指为用户提供信息发布、社交、交易、支付、视听等互联网平台服务的数据处理者。（十）大型互联网平台运营者是指用户超过五千万、处理大量个人信息和重要数据、具有强大社会动员能力和市场支配地位的互联网平台运营者。（十一）数据跨境安全网关是指阻断访问境外反动网站和有害信息、防止来自境外的网络攻击、管控跨境网络数据传输、防范侦查打击跨境网络犯罪的重要安全基础设施。（十二）公共信息是指数据处理者在提供公共服务过程中收集、产生的具有公共传播特性的信息。包括公开发布信息、可转发信息、无明确接收人信息等。第七十四条 涉及国家秘密信息、核心数据、密码使用的数据处理活动，按照国家有关规定执行。第七十五条 本条例自 年 月 日起施行。CITESTranslation: Cybersecurity Law of the People’s Republic of China (Effective June 1, 2017)Creemers, Rogier2018Translation: Data Security Law of the People’s Republic of China (Effective Sept. 1, 2021), DigiChina2021Translation: Personal Information Protection Law of the People’s Republic of China – Effective Nov. 1, 2021Creemers, Rogier2021Stanford Cyber Policy Center 616 Jane Stanford Way Stanford, CA 94305-6055 United States
