old id = 4310
About DW | DW
2021
https://www.dw.com/en/what-is-germanys-dual-education-system-and-why-do-other-countries-want-it/a-42902504/en/about-dw/profile/s-30688

Visit the new DW websiteTake a look at thebetaversion of dw.com. We're not done yet! Your opinion can help us make it better.
We use cookies to improve our service for you. You can find more information in our data protection declaration.
Unbiased information for free mindsDeutsche Welle (DW) is Germany’s international broadcaster and one of the most successful and relevant international media outlets. We provide journalistic content in 32 languages, giving people worldwide the opportunity to form their own opinions.
In 2021 DW reaches a new high of 289 million user contacts a week – an increase of 40 million (16 percent) from last year. Online offerings overtake TV formats for the first time. DW’s online services account for 122 million weekly user contacts. The strongest online platforms are Facebook and YouTube. TV usage reaches 117 million contacts per week and radio usage remains stable at 50 million.
Our VisionBy 2025, DW wants to strengthen its position as an essential source of digital information that inspires its target group with regionally-relevant, on-demand content that encourages dialogue.
DW Akademie is on track to becoming the leading European institution for media development.
TV show JaafarTalk in JordanOur ProgrammingOur offerings convey Germany as a liberal democracy rooted in European culture, providing a forum for German (and other) points of view on important topics, with the aim of promoting understanding and the exchange of ideas among different cultures and peoples.
Talk show To the Point recorded at DW's Berlin studiosOur experts produce high-quality multimedia content distributed through television, radio, social media and the internet. Our portfolio comprises TV channels in English, Arabic, Spanish and German; and digital content in 30 languages. Our 24-hour English language TV channel is available almost everywhere in the world.
Working locally in our target regions and with regional partners ensures that our content caters to our audience’s interests and demands.
Freedom. Dialogue. Expertise.
DW radio studio in Bonn, GermanyOur aim is to foster a peaceful, stable global community. Therefore, we focus on topics such as freedom and human rights, democracy and good governance, free trade and social justice, health education and environmental protection, technology and innovation.
Our AudienceWe reach out to young people, to opinion leaders, to those actively involved in public debate, and to everyone striving to understand what is happening in the world. Through our audience approach, we tell stories close to the hearts of our users, viewers and listeners and their everyday reality. We provide platforms for dialogue, we listen to their concerns, speak their languages and close information gaps.
Our German-language offerings are directed towards German speakers abroad and to those who teach or want to learn German.
Our DistributionWe rely on a global satellite network, on our roughly 5,000 partner stations, on the internet and increasingly, on mobile distribution. The DW app offers online content according to user preferences. Our radio broadcasts in ten languages continue to reach many people in Africa and parts of Asia.
Our DW AkademieWe believe that journalism, education and culture improve people's lives and that reliable, unbiased information and universal access to knowledge are fundamental rights.
DW Akademie in Accra, GhanaTogether with our partners around the world, we work to promote freedom of expression, human rights and the development of functioning media systems.
Our core focus areas are Media and Information Literacy (MIL), Media Viability, Media and Journalism Education and Innovation for Dialogue and Digital Rights. We pursue concrete approaches in these areas in order to strengthen the media. In this way, we contribute to the achievement of sustainable development.
Our EventsThe (GMF) is the international media conference organized DW. More than 2,000 participants from over 140 countries make the annual meeting at the plenary hall of the former German Bundestag in Bonn – known today as the World Conference Center Bonn (WCCB) – "The place made for minds."DW's Global Media Forum at the WCCB in 2012Media professionals get together to discuss the latest socio-political issues of our time and, in particular, how they relate to and are dealt with by the media. They are joined by decision-makers and influencers from politics and civil society, culture, education, business and science.
Our OrganizationDW is a public broadcaster financed by federal tax resources. Worldwide more than 4,000 employees of more than 140 nationalities are working for a common goal.
DW headquarters in BonnDiversityDW promotes a working environment that is free of prejudice. The aim is for all employees to feel respected and appreciated - regardless of gender and gender identity, nationality, ethnic origin, religion or beliefs, disability, age, sexual orientation and identity.
Since 2011, DW has been a member of the German employers' initiativeCharta der Vielfalt(charter of diversity) which is committed to promoting diversity in the workplace.
With the establishment of the International Relations and Diversity department in November 2019, DW's management has made diversity a high priority and initiated change processes.
OurCode of Conductdescribes the values we adhere to as part of our company culture and defines our responsibility towards our users and partners, society and the environment.
SustainabilityDW operates sustainably, by using resources efficiently, reducing its environmental footprint and getting involved in social issues. You can read more about DW Sustainability Managementhere.
Our mission, strategy and goalsSeveral documents define why DW was founded in 1953 and where Germany's international media organization is headed in the next few years.
Diversity ManagementHead of International Relations and DiversityZahra Nedjabat is the head of the department International Relations and Diversity at DW.
DW Sustainability ManagementDW is committed to people and the environment and to the fulfilment of the UN's Sustainable Development Goals. DW has outlined its progress towards targets in its climate action strategy and sustainability report.
DW Freedom26.06.2018In 2018, we launched the DW Freedom project to strengthen our support of freedom of speech and media freedom.
DW Freedom of Speech AwardSince 2015, the DW Freedom of Speech Award has honored a media person or initiative that has shown outstanding promotion of freedom rights.
Promoting freedom of speechWe are dedicated to unbiased journalism worldwideDW milestonesFrom shortwave radio to digital media outlet: The German foreign broadcaster's success story from 1953 to date.
DW marks 65th anniversary: TestimonialsMore Than Ever - Deutsche Welle Turns 65It has been 65 years since the Deutsche Welle began broadcasting. DW has been covering the issues shaping Germany and Europe from the Cold War through to the present day, when past challenges are re-emerging. This is a look back - and a look forward.
Chancellor helps DW celebrateGrab yourself a paper hat and toot your tin horn: Deutsche Welle celebrates 65 years of broadcastingMore videosDW marks 65th anniversary: TestimonialsMore Than Ever - Deutsche Welle Turns 65Chancellor helps DW celebrate© 2022 Deutsche Welle |Privacy Policy|Accessibility Statement|Legal notice|Contact|Mobile version
