old id = 94
Flesh became words | MIT Technology Review
2021
https://www.technologyreview.com/2022/04/27/1048493/flesh-became-words

Flesh became wordsNoam Chomsky and a fellow linguist who is also a neuroscientist converse on history, knowledge, language, brain science, technological euphoria, and “whether we can know everything.”Noam Chomsky, MIT professor of linguistics emeritus, and Andrea Moro, professor of general linguistics at the Institute for Advanced Study (IUSS) in Pavia, Italy, engaged in a provocative conversation in July 2021 that they’ve now expanded into a book,The Secrets of Words,due out in May from MIT Press.
“For me, our conversation was sheer pleasure,” Chomsky says. “It’s exciting to be able to engage with an inquiring and original mind on shared interests and ongoing research that both of us see as perhaps able to lift a few veils from the mysteries of language and thought—the core properties of our strange species.”Moro designed neuroscientific experiments, initially revealed in his 2016 book,Impossible Languages, that empirically proved Chomsky’s theory of generative grammar—the idea that human language was created by innate structures of the brain. As Moro says, “It’s not that ‘The Word’ became flesh, but flesh became words.”“Andrea’s inversion of the phrase in the Gospels brings to mind what’s known in the history of Western philosophy as ‘Locke’s suggestion,’” says Chomsky. “As Locke put it, after ‘the incomparable Mr. Newton’ had shown, to his dismay, that God had ‘annexed effects to motion, which we can in no way conceive motion able to produce,’ we are left with the possibility that God might have chosen to ‘superadd to matter a faculty of thinking.’ Stripping aside the theological framework, as was done in the years that followed, we reach the conclusion that those properties ‘termed mental’ are the result of ‘such an organical structure as that of the brain,’ [in the words of] Joseph Priestley.”The conclusion: “Flesh becomes word.”“If this is true,” Moro adds, “it can’t be the case that the simulation that engineers perform while constructing a talking machine allows us to better understand the brain. The crucial separation is between ‘simulate’ and ‘comprehend.’ Engineers simulate; we try to comprehend.”“The eye sees the stars, and the brain sees the constellations,” Moro explains. “The ear hears the words, and the brain hears the sentences. It’s like symphonies: it’s the brain that puts everything together.”Asked whetherThe Secrets of Wordshas a humanist message, Moro demurs, “The opposition between humanism and science was functional to the emancipation of science from theology. But now I think that the terms ‘humanism’ and ‘science’ are an obstacle to understanding reality. It seems to me that those terms divide what seems to be more united than ever: there can’t be a real distinction between what is human and what is real. And so we have a new challenge: to abandon this dichotomy—humanistic and scientific—and reconcile them methodologically, epistemologically. We have to use all tools to understand reality.”Chomsky and Moro celebrate how science has changed and what humans have learned. They also value the puzzles, surprises, mysteries, and secrets that remain—some of which may persist.
Recent books from the MIT communityA Shot in the Arm: How Science, Engineering, and Supply Chains Converged to Vaccinate the WorldBy Yossi Sheffi, professor of civil and environmental engineering and engineering systems and director of the Center for Transportation LogisticsMIT CTL Media, 2021, $9.99The New Breed: What Our History with Animals Reveals about Our Future with RobotsBy Kate Darling, research specialist at the MIT Media LabMACMILLAN, 2021, $14.99Insurance Era: Risk, Governance, and the Privatization of Security in Postwar AmericaBy Caley Horan, associate professor of historyUNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS, 2021, $40.00Life-Destroying DiagramsBy Eugenie Brinkema, associate professor of literatureDUKE UNIVERSITY PRESS, 2022, $31.95Unintended Lessons of Revolution: Student Teachers and Political Radicalism in Twentieth-Century MexicoBy Tanalís Padilla, professor of historyDUKE UNIVERSITY PRESS, 2022, $28.95From Darkness into Light:My Journey Through Nazism, Fascism, and Communism to FreedomBy Robert Ratonyi ’63FULTON BOOKS, 2022, $19.95byRosa A. EberlyShareThis story was part of our May/June 2022 issue.
PopularKeep ReadingMost PopularWhy China is still obsessed with disinfecting everythingMost public health bodies dealing with covid have long since moved on from the idea of surface transmission. China’s didn’t—and that helps it control the narrative about the disease’s origins and danger.
These materials were meant to revolutionize the solar industry. Why hasn’t it happened?Perovskites are promising, but real-world conditions have held them back.
Anti-aging drugs are being tested as a way to treat covidDrugs that rejuvenate our immune systems and make us biologically younger could help protect us from the disease’s worst effects.
A quick guide to the most important AI law you’ve never heard ofThe European Union is planning new legislation aimed at curbing the worst harms associated with artificial intelligence.
Stay connectedGet the latest updates fromMIT Technology ReviewDiscover special offers, top stories, upcoming events, and more.
Thank you for submitting your email!It looks like something went wrong.
We’re having trouble saving your preferences. Try refreshing this page and updating them one more time. If you continue to get this message, reach out to us atcustomer-service@technologyreview.comwith a list of newsletters you’d like to receive.
MIT Technology ReviewOur in-depth reporting reveals what’s going on now to prepare you for what’s coming next.
Subscribeto support our journalism.
AboutHelp© 2022 MIT Technology Review
