old id = 4233
Chinese nationalists are going after DiDi - Protocol
2015
https://www.protocol.com/china/china-nationalists-delete-didi-campaign

Chinese nationalists gear up for a 'Delete DiDi' campaignThey're calling the company and its executives "traitors," "running dogs" and worse.
First it was Alibaba in nationalist crosshairs. Now it's DiDi, which stands accused online of being a "sellout," a "Han traitor" and a "capitalist running dog." What happened?The car-hailing giant witha 90% market sharein China is under regulatory scrutiny in its home country shortly after its$4.4 billion U.S. IPO. China's Cyberspace Administration announced July 2 that it was reviewing the company's data infrastructure. On July 4, the administration ordered DiDi be removed from app stores due to "serious violations of laws and regulations in collecting and using personal data," further fueling public fury. Since then, instead of pining for DiDi's return, web users have traded unsubstantiated speculations about the company transferring troves of sensitive user, geographic and traffic data to the U.S.
There's no evidence that DiDi has handed its data to U.S. authorities, and Chinese laws ban companies from offering data stored within the country to foreign justice or law enforcement agencies without government approval. But that's not stopping the uproar.
On social media platforms like Weibo and Zhihu, web users have widely circulated a 2015big data analysisthat used aggregated data from DiDi to illustrate the amount and patterns of overtime that staff at central government agencies clocked, citing it as evidence to back their claims of DiDi leaking sensitive data — even though the aggregation was originally published by state news agency Xinhua.
The fact that DiDi's two major shareholders, SoftBank and Uber, which collectively owned34.3%of the company pre-IPO, are non-Chinese companies, in the eyes of nationalists, is anothersignof the company's disloyalty to China.
After digging through DiDi'sprospectus, nationalistic web users also discovered that one of DiDi's board of directors, Adrian Perica, an Apple vice president, is a U.S. Army veteran. "How much sensitive data has this American army officer obtained from DiDi in the past five years?" DiDi criticsasked out loud.
"As a vehicle for hire company, [DiDi] can be completely replaced or shut down from the national security perspective," a distressed tech blogger with nearly 3 million followerswroteon Weibo. "If it crosses the red line, not only the country will not tolerate it, I am afraid the people will not, either."DiDi is under a cybersecurity review aimed at assessing the national security implications of the procurement and installation of "network products and services" by operators who are deemed to be "critical information infrastructure operators," of which DiDi is one. "Network products and services" can be equipment that includes computers, servers, databases and cloud computing.
According toThe Wall Street Journal, Chinese officials are concerned that if the equipment for DiDi's servers were procured overseas, it could expose DiDi's data to security risks.
Not only DiDi has faced fervent nationalist condemnation: Its president, Jean Liu, and her father, Liu Chuanzhi (founder of the computer maker Lenovo), have been drubbed on the Chinese web. "It's really a family with treasonous genes," one Weibo userwrote.
Facing mounting criticism, on July 3, DiDi Vice President Li Mintook to Weibo to refutethat "DiDi's domestic data is stored on domestic servers, and there is no way that the data will be handed over to the United States." In a separate post, Li added: "That includes traffic data. Please stop malicious speculation."But Li's clarification barely made a dent. The most popular comments under his posts suggest commentators believed DiDi has violated Chinese laws and applauded authorities' decisions to protect national security and personal information. As an editorial by the nationalist, state-backed Global Timesput it, the removal of DiDi's app "boosts public confidence." DiDi did not respond to a request for immediate comment on the social media firestorm.
Not only are nationalistic web users not content with DiDi's response, but DiDi users are actively deleting the app,posting screenshotsto show their boycott resolution. Apostthat suggested car-hailing app alternatives on Weibo has been reposted over 20,000 times.
"I am Chinese, and I am proud, but some people like DiDi Chuxing would sell out the country for money, Chinese traitors are coming," a Weibo userwrote, adding that DiDi president Liu and CEO Cheng Wei "would rather be American dogs than Chinese!""I hereby ask everyone to delete your DiDi Chuxing account... so they can't earn a penny in China."Bursts of nationalistic fervor have swept across China in the past few years as geopolitical tensions between Beijing and a host of foreign countries, as well as Hong Kong and Taiwan, have escalated. Just this year, grassroots nationalists launched hate campaigns againstfeminist activists,popular science bloggersand queer communities, cobbling up what they consider evidence of the individual's or groups' foreign associations in order to expose their disloyalty to China or what they assert as anti-China sentiment.
PROTOCOLCHINAWe bring you all the latest headlines and break down the biggest stories in China tech. Every Wednesday, with alerts on key stories and research.
Your information will be used in accordance with ourPrivacy PolicyThank you for signing up. Please check your inbox to verify your email.
Log inSorry, something went wrong. Please try again.
A login link has been emailed to you - please check your inbox.
Shen Lu is a former Protocol reporter, covering China's tech industry.
Data privacy and harassment could spoil Grindr’s Wall Street romanceAs it pursues a long-held goal of going public, the gay dating app has to confront its demons.
Grindr may finally be a public company.
Veronica Irwin (@vronirwin) is a San Francisco-based reporter at Protocol, covering breaking news. Previously she was at the San Francisco Examiner, covering tech from a hyper-local angle. Before that, her byline was featured in SF Weekly, The Nation, Techworker, Ms. Magazine and The Frisc.
Grindr's looking for more than just a hookup with Wall Street. Finding a stable relationship may be tough.
The location-based dating app favored by gay men was a pioneer, predating Tinder by three years. It’s bounced from owner to owner after founder Joel Simkhai sold it in 2018 for $245 million. A SPAC merger could be the answer, but businesses serving the LGBTQ+ community have had trouble courting investors. And Grindr has its own unique set of challenges.
Introduced in 2009, Grindr pioneered the use of then-new iPhone location features to show nearby users ready to chat or, well, go further. Itsdistinctive notification soundbecame a way LGBTQ+ people could stealthily reveal themselves to each other — or prank their friends. Grindr got blamed for killing gay bars — a chargeSimkhai disputed— and coarseningLGBTQ+ dating culture. Despite those critiques and the emergence of challengers, Grindr still has a commanding position in gay dating apps.
On May 9, Grindr announced it planned to go public through a SPAC deal that would value the company at $2.1 billion, almost 10 times what it sold for four years ago. If shareholders approve the merger, Grindr will finally be a public company — something it’s beenseekingsince 2018.
Grindr primarily makes money off ads, with some revenue from user subscriptions for premium features. About 94% of Grindr’s 11 million monthly active users worldwide use it for free, according to aninvestor presentation.
Social apps all deal with moderating content and keeping bad actors off their networks. Grindr, though, has some unique challenges because of the nature of its app and many users’ preference for discretion. Names, public photos, pronouns and sexual orientation are all optional.
Grindr hasn’t always kept users’ data as private as they’d expect. Those breaches as well as discrimination and harassment issues have brought the companynegative media reports,lawsuitsandregulatory actions abroad.
The company is promising investors that there’s$14 trillionto be made serving the LGBTQ+ community — a pitch that companieslike PlanetOuthave made in the past. The pullback in tech stocks and SPAC deals in particular, combined with its reputational challenges, could make Grindr a difficult partner for some investors.
SPAC to the futureGrindr’s had past relationship trouble. After Simkhai sold his creation to Beijing Kunlun, a Chinese gaming company, in 2018, users and lawmakers alike had questions. The straight owner of Grindrdrew a firestorm ofcriticism after he characterized marriage as a “holy matrimony” between a man and a woman. And CFIUS, the U.S. government body that reviews foreign acquisitions of American companies for national security risks,decided it was a national security risk: You only had to spin up Grindr near a U.S. military base and hear that notification sound pop off to understand why.
With the Beijing Kunlun-Grindr pairing clearly doomed, a consortium of investorspurchased the appfrom the Chinese company in May 2020. Just a few months later, Raymond Zage, an investor in that group, helped start a SPAC called Tiga Acquisition Corp.
Under SEC rules, a SPAC isn’t supposed to have a target in mind, but with a deadline to strike a deal looming, it landed on Grindr. Zage’s conflict of interest isextensively detailed in the deal’s S-4 filing, which advises investors of the risks involved.
The concern is that Zage might want to “make a sweet deal with Grindr's shareholders,” said Stanford Law School professor Michael Klausner. Tiga hired an independent financial firm, Duff & Phelps, and offered a financial analysis, but Klausner said that’s hardly adequate. “A banker's fairness opinion in a SPAC is not worth the paper it is written on,” he said.
Tiga paid Duff & Phelps $600,000 for the fairness opinion, according to a filing, with some of that payable after the deal is completed. Duff & Phelps and parent company Kroll did not respond to a request for comment.
Grindr had revenue of $104.5 million in 2020, growing almost 40% to $145.8 million in 2021, making itfar smaller than Bumble, a publicly traded dating app that Duff & Phelps used in its comparisons. Grindr lost $13.1 million in 2020 and made $5.1 million last year.
Another consideration: The SPAC market has cratered this year amid a general pullback in stocks,according to datafrom SPACInsider, and no deals have been completed in 2022.
The privacy problemEven if Grindr pulls off its SPAC deal in a hostile market, it will have to deal with thorny privacy challenges. Theproxy statementfor the SPAC deal lists conflicts of interest, backlash over data privacy and harassment and abuse as major risks.
Three forces are pulling the company in different directions: Users want it to protect their information and give up as little as possible. Moderating content and fighting harassment inevitably require surveillance. And advertisers want at least some glimmering of who’s seeing their messages.
Grindr has been criticized for weak privacy protections. Late last year, the company wasfinedfor sharing private data with advertisers, for example, and aWall Street Journalinvestigation this month showed that individual users' location data was being tracked and sold from at least 2017 to 2020. The company has alsobeen criticizedfor operating in countries where being gay is illegal, and the mere use the app could be a serious, even deadly, risk.
The company says users can opt out of sharing data with ad partners and delete their accounts and related information, except in “some scenarios,” which Grindr defines as mostly related to tax and accounting purposes. When an individual initiates an account deletion, global head of Customer Experience Alice Hunsberger said that Grindr usually deletes that data on the server side a few days later.
This emphasis on privacy and speedy deletion of data, however, also has a downside: It makes it difficult for Grindr to find and ban bad actors. Protocol spoke to and reviewed screenshots from one person who said they were harassed on the basis of their identity and threatened with violence by someone they met on Grindr — two clear violations of the app’sterms of service.
The individual deleted their own Grindr account but reported the harassment to Grindr by email. Grindr said it could not find the accused harasser’s account.
Hunsberger said reporting abuse outside the app makes it more difficult for moderators to find the offending account, in part because of the company’s policy of deleting server-side data. It also has comparatively sparse resources devoted to moderating its 11 million monthly active users: According to the company, it has 75 moderators contracted through the company PartnerHero. Grindr recentlypartnered with Spectrum Labs, an AI company, to help scale its content moderation.
“That number is woefully insufficient to deal with a platform that has hundreds of thousands of posts on a given day,” said Northeastern University professor Ari Waldman, who specializes in law and computer science and hasbeen vocalabout Grindr’s content-moderation policies.
Hunsberger, for her part, sees content moderation as a tricky trade-off for a company primarily serving LGBTQ+ users. “Banning somebody from Grindr for life is essentially cutting them off from their community,” said Hunsberger. Grindr has to weigh that against the need to protect that same community, she said.
The golden rainbowThe flip side of having a demographic that’s hard to serve is that advertisers may be all the more eager to reach them. Traditional LGBTQ+ media outlets are in decline: Out and Advocate only publish in print six times a year, and Paramount’s Logo isairing rerunsof “The Nanny” and “The Facts of Life” on cable. Grindr users, by contrast, spend an average of61 minutes a dayon the app, and open it multiple times a day.
The pitch for Grindr includes the kind of stats that make marketers’ mouths water: LGBTQ+ people in the United States spend 30% more on recreational activities, 36% are luxury travelers and have a 18% higher median household income.
“We’re still just beginning our monetization and growth journey,” Grindr CEO Jeff Bonforte said in apress release.
That journey’s going to happen without Bonforte, a veteran of online media who made his name at Yahoo, but who’s notpart of Grindr’s target demographic. Grindr is looking for an LGBTQ+ executive to replace him; there is no guarantee it’ll find one, the company says. Ironic, perhaps, for an app that made its name by helping its users locate their tribe.
Veronica Irwin (@vronirwin) is a San Francisco-based reporter at Protocol, covering breaking news. Previously she was at the San Francisco Examiner, covering tech from a hyper-local angle. Before that, her byline was featured in SF Weekly, The Nation, Techworker, Ms. Magazine and The Frisc.
Why the digital transformation of industries is creating a more sustainable futureQualcomm’s chief sustainability officer Angela Baker on how companies can view going “digital” as a way not only toward growth, as laid out in a recentreport,but also toward establishing and meeting environmental, social and governance goals.
Chris Stokel-Walker is a freelance technology and culture journalist and author of "YouTubers: How YouTube Shook Up TV and Created a New Generation of Stars." His work has been published in The New York Times, The Guardian and Wired.
Three letters dominate business practice at present: ESG, or environmental, social and governance goals. The number of mentions of the environment in financial earnings hasdoubled in the last five years, according to GlobalData: 600,000 companies mentioned the term in their annual or quarterly results last year.
But meeting those ESG goals can be a challenge — one that businesses can’t and shouldn’t take lightly. Ahead of an exclusive fireside chat at Davos, Angela Baker, chief sustainability officer at Qualcomm, sat down with Protocol to speak about how best to achieve those targets and how Qualcomm thinks about its own sustainability strategy, net zero commitment, other ESG targets and more.
What should companies be thinking about, and what do they need to know, when it comes to achieving climate goals?There are three things that companies need to know when it comes to setting climate goals. The first thing I would say is that if you're going to set a climate goal as a business, it needs to be a businesswide effort. It cannot live within just the corporate responsibility or the sustainability team as it often does. It really has to be incorporated across the entire company.
The second is that if a company is going to set a climate target, it needs to be able to commit budget and resources to meeting those goals. It can be expensive to incorporate these goals across operations, so that is something that companies need to be prepared for.
Finally, there must be room for creativity and flexibility. It’s important to recognize there are a lot of things we don’t know yet. You have to be able to jump in without knowing everything, which is hard for a lot of companies. It's risky, but ultimately worth it.
What's been the limiting factor to effect change and reach those goals?Some of the rate-limiting factors are that all these companies are setting targets, whether or not they’re aligned with the Science Based Targets initiative, and everybody’s competing for renewable projects. But fundamentally the biggest challenge is that companies are trying to balance growing and turning a profit while also doing right by their stakeholders and the environment — but these two priorities are not yet weighted equally. We’re getting there, with shareholders and investors urging, but it’s not quite even yet.
What needs to change for it to be even?Some things are happening already. Stakeholders are leading the charge here for more transparency and information around how products and services are made, for more data to be released publicly. Everyone from investors and shareholders to policymakers, employees and customers have interests here. How a company operates and how it makes its products are important questions, no matter the industry.
And how can technology help with that?This is a big question. As a first step, companies need to look at the data and understand their sustainability baseline. For some companies, just getting their environmental data in order is a big undertaking, but you can’t really set a target until you know where you’re starting from.
Once a company understands its sustainability baseline, it is important to identify areas that the company can feasibly make more sustainable, and then address those areas. Implementing technology that improves connectivity and provides greater insight into operations will prove to be the solution for many companies. An example of this could be a manufacturing facility installing energy sensors into its machinery that can monitor energy consumption in real time and turn off different machines when not in use. Another example might be a farmer using drones for pesticide distribution. The drone collects and interprets real-time data, which allows for more efficient and accurate spraying so that crops are covered with less pesticide residue. It all comes down to digitization — as companies and eventually industries digitally transform, they will also become more sustainable.
What role does 5G play in combatting climate change?5G is the core infrastructure to driving digital transformation, and as a result, will contribute in a significant way to combating climate change. Weproduced a U.S. reportthat highlights the many ways 5G technology can achieve critically needed sustainability benefits. The findings show that 5G will enable the reduction of 374 million metric tons of greenhouse gas emissions, save 410 billion gallons of water nationwide, reduce pesticide usage in the United States by 50% and increase fuel efficiency by 20% through optimized lane management systems and traffic management systems enabled by C-V2X. There are so many use cases that illustrate that when 5G is fully realized, it will help reduce emissions in massive amounts that will have an actual impact on the planet.
How has Qualcomm managed its own commitment to address climate change?In 2014, we committed to a 30% greenhouse gas emission reduction goal for Scope 1 and Scope 2, which is tied to our own operations and the electricity we buy. Since committing to that goal, we have reduced our Scope 1 and 2 emissions by 20%. Last November, we took it a step further andset a net zero goalacross Scopes 1, 2 and 3 by 2040, and we have interim targets set to align ourselves with the Science Based Targets initiative.
We were the first large cap semiconductor company to make a net zero commitment. We know the Earth’s population is growing: It's expected to grow from 7 billion to 10 billion people by 2050, which means there's going to be more energy being used. We set this goal to highlight that this an important issue and something we are prioritizing throughout the company. Things have to change, and we are doing our part to change the status quo.
What’s that journey been like?It's been really incredible. We are focused on what we can do to reduce our own operational footprint and how we can help our partners across industries reduce theirs as well. Examples of this might be through leveraging 5G to digitally transform their business or developing energy-efficient products. What many people don’t know is that Qualcomm has been building energy-efficient products since our founding — power efficiency is in our DNA — so we are really well-positioned to play a larger role in the digital and green transformation of industries.
What's the one thing that companies implementing new technology to digitally transform their business and meet climate goals often overlook?There is pressure to get things done quickly, but it’s important to pause and look at what makes sense for the business. Every company is different — what makes sense for Qualcomm, which is primarily fabless, may not make sense for another company with a huge manufacturing footprint. If you’re a retailer with a huge supply chain doing a ton of shipping, it’s a different model.
All of this goes back to sustainability and, frankly, ESG more broadly needing to be a businesswide effort, with people from across the company working on these issues. What makes sense for the tourism industry is not necessarily going to work for a semiconductor company. But both can reduce their footprint.
Chris Stokel-Walker is a freelance technology and culture journalist and author of "YouTubers: How YouTube Shook Up TV and Created a New Generation of Stars." His work has been published in The New York Times, The Guardian and Wired.
Inside the Crypto Cannabis ClubAs crypto crashes, an NFT weed club holds on to the high.
The Crypto Cannabis Club’s Discord has 23,000 subscribers, with 28 chapters globally.
Nat Rubio-Licht is a Los Angeles-based news writer at Protocol. They graduated from Syracuse University with a degree in newspaper and online journalism in May 2020. Prior to joining the team, they worked at the Los Angeles Business Journal as a technology and aerospace reporter.
On a Saturday night in downtown Los Angeles, a group of high strangers gathered in a smoky, colorful venue less than a mile from Crypto.com Arena. The vibe was relaxed but excited, and the partygoers, many of whom were meeting each other for the very first time, greeted each other like old friends, calling each other by their Discord names. The mood was celebratory: The Crypto Cannabis Club, an NFT community for stoners, was gathering to celebrate the launch of its metaverse dispensary.
The warmth and belonging of the weed-filled party was a contrast to the metaverse store, which was underwhelming by comparison. But the dispensary launch and the NFTs required to buy into the group are just an excuse: As with most Web3 projects, it’s really about the community. Even though crypto is crashing, taking NFTs with it, the Crypto Cannabis Club is unphased, CEO Ryan Hunter told Protocol.
‘We all grow together’The community is what brought CCC members to downtown LA, ostensibly for the 4/20 launch of the metaverse dispensary. The club’s 6,000-odd members had to acquire a “toker,” an NFT of a brightly colored, stoned-looking character, to get into the group and take advantage of its perks, which include in-person events. The floor price for a toker sits at around 0.15 ETH, or roughly $300 (right now — who knows what the future brings?).
April and Manny Hernandez love the club so much that they flew from New York to LA to attend. Manny owns nine tokers, and April owns just one. The couple traveled to Playa del Carmen, Mexico, in March for another CCC meetup.
“Being ex-military, the camaraderie is something that I look for,” Manny told me. “It’s awesome to have this type of access to these types of events. We all grow together.”As the couple turned to walk away, I saw Manny’s flashy attire: a lab coat with the words “Crypto Cannabis Club” spelled in rhinestones on the back, which he said he designed and bedazzled himself.
As I weaved my way through the crowd, I spotted Hunter, wearing an embroidered shirt with pot leaves on either shoulder, smiling ear to ear as he greeted excited guests. He pointed me toward the weed.
The front room was shrouded in colorful light, with neon signs of blue, purple and green scattered throughout the walls and ceiling. After guests picked up their party favors, they were greeted with a dab bar, a table lined with devices to smoke different cannabis concentrates, with two employees from cannabis tech brand Dr. Dabber helping people light up. The next table over, three marijuana growers from High Water Farm were giving away baggies of the plant itself. Guests excitedly lined the tables, chatting and laughing and hugging in between inhales. It smelled exactly how you’d expect.
I walked through a brightly lit foyer to a second room: a warehouse with sky-high ceilings bathed in a dim green light and filled with smoke. A bar with two bartenders was set up in the corner, serving both alcoholic and cannabis-infused cocktails. Two guests took turns taking videos of one another in the middle of the venue, blowing clouds of smoke from a comically large joint. Out back was a truck providing free tacos and burritos — by the end of the night, there was nothing left.
Photo: Nat Rubio-Licht/ProtocolThe dab bar, provided by Dr. Dabber, set up for guests who wanted to partake.
From boom to crashThe high of the party just weeks ago is a far cry from the vibe today, though Hunter said Crypto Cannabis Club remains “an oasis in the middle of this crazy desert that we're going through.” The price of the group’s NFTs dipped slightly last week, with the floor reaching around 0.1 ETH, but has since bounced back by 50%. Other NFT communities have become “ghost towns,” Hunter said, but through their shared Discord and social media channels, the club’s members continue to support each other.
The group mostly connects through the Discord server, which has thousands of members, but members occasionally get to meet in person at parties like the one I attended. The energy of the Discord channel has been reassuring in the midst of the crypto crash, with members encouraging each other to “hold tight.” The Crypto Cannabis Club is a “weird one where passion for the project fuels its floor [price],” one said. Some are even using the strong sense of community amid the chaos as a recruiting opportunity, Hunter said, urging more people to buy in as the floor price has declined in recent weeks.
And with the price tag of its NFTs recovering, some even trading at three to four times the floor price, Hunter said, the Crypto Cannabis Club seems to be on the upswing for now.
“I don't want to jinx anything, but I think there's a lot of encouraging signs there from where I'm sitting,” Hunter said. “Our hope is that, as things settle a bit, people will really understand the value of what we're offering and see it as a sustainable collection.”NFTs for weedThe founders of the Crypto Cannabis Club, Kevin and Jim Fitzpatrick, worked in the cannabis industry for nearly a decade before getting into the crypto space in 2020. The duo noticed that communities were starting to form around NFT collections and found that there wasn’t a solid community for cannabis consumers. So they launched the club last July, with Hunter taking the helm as CEO in January after spending a few months as an adviser.
The Crypto Cannabis Club community came together quickly: The entire NFToker collection was minted and then sold out just seven days after launch, with the lowest-priced tokers selling for 0.8 ETH, or roughly $200 to $250 at the time. The 10,000 NFTs in the Crypto Cannabis Club’s NFT collection are owned by around 4,500 digital wallets, said Hunter. You don’t have to own an NFT to be part of the fun, though membership does have some perks. The group’s Discord has 23,000 subscribers and it has 28 chapters globally. Some of the group’s high profile members include rappers Ja Rule and Lil Baby, Cookies CEO Berner and actors Cheech Marin and Tommy Chong.
Membership isn’t cheap: The club’s NFTs start at a couple hundred dollars on the low end. The rare ones, Hunter said, can cost thousands more.
“They all have different characteristics. Some of those characteristics are more unique than others. So the characters that have the greatest number of the most unique traits tend to be the most valuable from a collector’s perspective,” he said.
But owning one does come with quite a few benefits. NFT holders get access to all Crypto Cannabis Club events, both virtual and in person. The club also has partnerships with two dozen cannabis brands and accessory manufacturers, so members get discounts on weed and accessories.
Weed in the metaverseWhile crypto is crashing, tech companies are still all-in on metaverse investments. The Crypto Cannabis Club’s metaverse dispensary in the Cryptovoxels virtual world opened, appropriately, on 4/20. The VR dispensary, which can also be accessed via web browser, is essentially an online weed shop where members can purchase marijuana and smoking accessories to be shipped directly to them.
“It’s really a gathering place for our community,” Hunter said.
When I first clicked into the dispensary, a gray, faceless avatar with a placard above its head reading “anonymous” popped into an empty room. That weird little avatar was me. I peered around and noticed a brick wall emblazoned with the word “vibes,” a wooden countertop with Crypto Cannabis Club labels on it and a teeny tiny virtual cash register. Once I figured out how to turn my avatar around, I was greeted by a massive purple and green sign: “Welcome to the Crypto Cannabis Club.” One of the group’s signature toker characters popped up, and a glass case filled with virtual marijuana plants tempted me to wander over.
The metaverse dispensary displayed the Crypto Cannabis Club's brand on one wall, each colorful character representing both a strain of marijuana and a complimentary NFT that the buyer gets with their purchase.
Screenshot: Nat Rubio-Licht/ProtocolThe “store” part of the metaverse dispensary is a colorful room dotted with art pieces displaying popular online weed shop names. You click through the logos for brands you want to shop at, which bring you to their websites outside of the dispensary. My avatar wandered up to the second story, the “toker arena,” where a dozen or so NFTs in picture frames lined the walls and virtual tables, chairs and couches are scattered throughout the room. I couldn’t figure out how to sit down — my avatar just walked right through.
Though the virtual space wasn’t as exciting as the real-world party when I visited, it’s not always so empty, according to Hunter. The club held an event on the day of the launch that spanned hours so members could drop in at 4:20 local time. Dozens of people were chatting and exploring the space at any given point, Hunter said, with music and videos playing in the virtual auditorium.
“What we're trying to maintain is that welcoming sense of community,” said Hunter. “If you're a cannabis consumer, it's what you would expect from the real world. We're trying to develop that same vibe in a virtual way as well.”While entertaining to click through, the dispensary felt like a simple video game rather than a weed shop from the future. The CCC’s dispensary was just one of several spaces I could explore with my avatar. In an attempt to see what the rest of the world was like, I took a wrong turn and fell into the deep virtual waters of a place called “Shell Beach.” If the metaverse is the future, it needs a bit of work — or at least some guardrails between my avatar and the sea.
The Crypto Cannabis Club's space sits on the virtual waterfront of Shell Beach (which is surprisingly easy to fall into.)Screenshot: Nat Rubio-Licht/ProtocolA different kind of crypto clubBut no one at the party seemed to be there for the metaverse dispensary. The unifying thread was the community: getting to hang out with other weed-loving crypto owners. Matt Kaestner, a real estate broker in Orange County, compared the Crypto Cannabis Club to internet communities of the early 2000s, when groups of like-minded people congregated online to hang out and be weird together.
“This is no different than that, 15 years later,” he said. “You’re starting to see these communities pop up that provide different benefits and bond members, like cannabis.”Kaestner said he’s always been a “part of the culture” of cannabis, and got into crypto as it started to boom over the last few years. When he first discovered the Crypto Cannabis Club last summer, he said it felt like a “perfect fit.” At that point, he was new to the world of NFTs. Now, he owns 45 of the club’s NFTs, ranging in value from a few hundred to several thousand dollars.
“As the club started, I saw more and more of the community come together to share this common interest,” he said. “Once you meet each other in real life at an event like this, it really seals the friendships and relationships.”Health care worker Sergio Collado’s passions for cannabis and crypto made the decision to join the club a “no-brainer.” Collado owns eight tokers, and though he’s open to selling a few, he called two of them his “forever tokers.” One is a character with green skin and floppy brown hair wearing a shirt covered in pineapples with a joint hanging from its mouth. Collado had the character printed on his shirt. Collado said the other resembles him the most, wearing a similar chain to his and sporting the same haircut.
Holding on to the highThe Crypto Cannabis Club has been around for less than a year, but the group has been busy. In that time, the company has held five events and meetups, including weed business convention MJBizCon, Art Basel and a multiday trip to Mexico for members.
And it’s not slowing down anytime soon, Hunter said. The club is working on hosting more events, collaborating with more cannabis brands and bringing its proprietary cannabis brand to more states (it’s currently only available in California). It’s also working on opening a second metaverse space and launching its next NFT collection. Those diversified revenue streams could help the group weather the crypto winter. But the biggest goal, Hunter said, is to grow the community, which may be a tough sell given the current crypto climate.
The 4/20 party was a snapshot in time, just weeks before billions of dollars in crypto value seemingly vanished overnight. But as I walked out, a performer named DJ Positivity began their set. People I’d just met waved goodbye to me like I’d known them for years. I had a bit of a secondhand buzz, and on the car ride home, Manny Hernandez’s words stuck in my head: “We all grow together.” Even if NFTs lose their value, maybe the cannabis club members can hold on to the high.
Nat Rubio-Licht is a Los Angeles-based news writer at Protocol. They graduated from Syracuse University with a degree in newspaper and online journalism in May 2020. Prior to joining the team, they worked at the Los Angeles Business Journal as a technology and aerospace reporter.
The minerals we need to save the planet are getting way too expensiveSupply chain problems and rising demand have sent prices spiraling upward for the minerals and metals essential for the clean energy transition.
Critical mineral prices have exploded over the past year.
Lisa Martine Jenkins is a senior reporter at Protocol covering climate. Lisa previously wrote for Morning Consult, Chemical Watch and the Associated Press. Lisa is currently based in Brooklyn, and is originally from the Bay Area. Find her on Twitter (@l_m_j_) or reach out via email (ljenkins@protocol.com).
The newest source of the alarm bells echoing throughout the renewables industry? Spiking critical mineral and metal prices.
According to a new report from the International Energy Agency, a maelstrom of rising demand and tattered supply chains have caused prices for thematerials needed for clean energy technologiesto soar in the last year. And this increase has only accelerated since 2022 began.
Meanwhile, prices of copper, nickel and aluminum rose by roughly 25% to 40% in 2021, and have continued to increase so far this year.
“For most minerals and metals that are vital to the clean energy transition, the price increases since 2021 exceed by a wide margin the largest annual increases seen in the 2010s,” IEA analyst Tae-Yoon Kim noted in aWednesday report.
Indeed, these jumps come against a backdrop of relatively stable prices over the last decade that have allowed the renewable industry to flourish. In the 2010s, for instance, the average annual price increases for all the minerals were modest: 1% for aluminum at the low end, and 13% for lithium at the high.
Clean energy technology prices have actually fallen steadily throughout the last decade, as both innovation and economies of scale have made building things like solar PV cells and batteries more efficient while the cost of raw materials only ticked up slightly. But the IEA said that trend could reverse course, as demand increases and critical materials become pricier.
The demand shock has been compounded by the supply challenges presented by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, which has caused many countries to reassess how much they want to rely on Russian resources. While plans to phase out Russian oil imports havegrabbed headlines, the country is also a major supplier of critical minerals.
Russia is among the top producers of nickel, cobalt and graphite, all of which are used to make batteries. It’s the top producer of palladium, used in catalytic converters, as well as of enriched uranium needed to keep nuclear power plants running. In fact, Russia produces 45% of the world’s enriched uranium, which hasled the U.S. to scrambleto find alternative sources.
As Kim explained, “the country’s increasing international isolation puts additional pressure on already tight markets.” Recent turmoil in nickel markets especially, he wrote, represented “a wake-up call regarding the importance of diversified supply sources.” Getting to those new supply sources, however, presents its own problem. Global supply chains remain a mess, and not just for critical minerals.
The timing could not be worse. These are materials that will be crucial to expanding the use of renewable energy in the coming decades, and especially toelectrify transportation and homesalike. But higher prices mean it is harder to make the economic case for the energy transition, even if all other systems are a go.
Lisa Martine Jenkins is a senior reporter at Protocol covering climate. Lisa previously wrote for Morning Consult, Chemical Watch and the Associated Press. Lisa is currently based in Brooklyn, and is originally from the Bay Area. Find her on Twitter (@l_m_j_) or reach out via email (ljenkins@protocol.com).
The 911 system is outdated. Updating it to the cloud is risky.
Unlike tech companies, emergency services departments can’t afford to make mistakes when migrating to the cloud. Integrating new software in an industry where there’s no margin for error is risky, and sometimes deadly.
In an industry where seconds can mean the difference between life and death, many public safety departments are hesitant to take risks on new cloud-based technologies.
Aisha Counts (@aishacounts) is a reporter at Protocol covering enterprise software. Formerly, she was a management consultant for EY. She's based in Los Angeles and can be reached at acounts@protocol.com.
Dialing 911 could be the most important phone call you will ever make. But what happens when the software that’s supposed to deliver that call fails you? It may seem simple, but the technology behind a call for help is complicated, and when it fails, deadly.
The infrastructure supporting emergency contact centers is one of the most critical assets for any city, town or local government. But just as the pandemic exposed the creaky tech infrastructure that runs local governments, in many cases the technology in those call centers is outdated and hasn’t been touched for decades.
Now more than ever, first responders and public safety officials are recognizing the need to take 911 into the cloud. But in an industry whereseconds can mean the difference between life and death, many public safety departments are hesitant to take risks on new cloud-based technologies.
However, that doesn’t mean they aren’t aware of the limitations of their current systems. The need for increased resilience in the face of outages or natural disasters, a desire for better location data and the benefits of introducing more ways of communicating with first responders via text or video are pushing some 911 systems into the cloud.
Making the callThe first 911 call was made only 40 to 50 years ago, said Robin Erkkila, a 911 solutions engineer at software company Bandwidth.
Although it appears straightforward on the surface, dialing 911 requires a number of parties to interact, from telecommunications providers and device manufacturers to local governments and first responders.
When a 911 call is placed in the modern era, it probably goes first to a cell phone carrier, then to the 911 network normally operated by state governments, where it's then routed to a public safety answering point, or PSAP, said Brandon Abley, director of Technology for the National Emergency Number Association. “That's where someone answers your call and dispatches somebody,” he said. “And then you finally have people in the field. That's the fifth domain where we have to get the information out to the terminal and the firefighters.”At each point in this process, some form of technology is involved, whether it's checking a caller’s location or identifying the nearest fire station.
Basically what happened is that since the ‘70s and ‘80s, the technology there hasn't changed a great deal.
The challenge is that the technology supporting most 911 systems is often outdated. “Basically what happened is that since the ‘70s and ‘80s, the technology there hasn't changed a great deal,” said Alex Dizengof, co-founder and CTO of cloud-based emergency communications provider Carbyne. That’s because building systems to support 911 contact centers or PSAPs is a lot more complicated than traditional contact centers.
For one, any system that supports 911 faces the challenges of being both incredibly open and readily accessible, yet extremely secure. “Everyone can dial 911 but on the other hand, it's supposed to be the most secure platform ever built by the government,” said Dizengof.
Emergency contact centers still face many of the same challenges as traditional on-premises contact centers. Like traditional contact centers, some 911 dispatch centers are limited in the number of calls they can handle or are subject to the impacts of physical damage in the event of a natural disaster. These challenges are further elevated by the critical nature of the services these dispatch centers provide.
In most contact centers, there are limits to the number of calls that can be handled concurrently. While that can be inconvenient for a traditional contact center, it’s mission critical for 911. During a national emergency such as a hurricane or earthquake, a PSAP could receive several dozen if not hundreds of calls at the same time, but only be able to handle 14 simultaneously, said Dizengof. Even if there were more calls, the contact center just couldn’t take them.
In other cases, a natural disaster can completely overtake a public safety answering point, preventing dispatch operators from communicating with first responders. In the past, during a hurricane for example, “you had dispatch centers that were literally ripping equipment out of the racks and trying to get them into trucks so they could drive somewhere else and set up,” said Abley.
There are other challenges that are unique to 911 contact centers, like the need to quickly and accurately pinpoint a caller’s location. Although modern consumer devices can easily determine a caller’s location, that same technology hasn’t made its way into the 911 system. If a caller’s location isn’t properly identified, it delays the process of dispatching first responders.
In the early days of 911, the location of a caller was easily determined because telephone companies knew exactly where their landlines were, said Abley; each phone had an associated address. But when cell phones were invented, that same process no longer worked.
Many 911 systems route calls based on which cellular tower the phone is connected to as a workaround, but that has its challenges too. For example, If a caller lives in New Jersey but is connected to a cell tower in New York, their call would be routed to a public safety answering point in New York, said Dizengof. Unfortunately that problem is fairly common.
“I know that some PSAPs are still receiving between 10 and sometimes even 20% of misrouted calls where they need to answer them and route them back to the correct jurisdiction,” he said.
The 911 cloudMigrating to the cloud has the potential to solve many of the challenges facing 911 contact centers, from providing flexibility to scale contact center seats seamlessly to enabling better resilience in the face of outages or natural disasters.
Scale is one of the traditional benefits of the cloud, providing the ability to adjust capacity up and down as needed without having to pay for a fixed number of physical seats. A sheriff's office can’t necessarily afford to build a contact center that operates dozens of seats or thousands of backup servers, said Abley. “It's just a scale they can't operate at, but that's the business model that cloud providers offer.”The cloud also provides much-needed resilience to a critical operation that needs to run 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
“Today when you're doing legacy 911 deployments, you have physical lines coming to physical centers,” said Dizengof. But if there’s a flood or a fire, those lines are just going to be cut and put the PSAP out of operation. “It's very tragic and it's very devastating when the most important service during this natural disaster that should function is 911 and it's not functioning.”Operating in the cloud helps limit these types of disruptions from power or connectivity failures. With the cloud, since infrastructure isn’t tightly coupled to a physical location, it ensures that no 911 contact center has a single point of failure. If cloud systems “are geo-diverse, they operate multiple call centers [and] operate in a virtual cloud spread across the country, then you're not gonna go down,” said Erkkila.
The prevalence of misrouted calls can also be reduced via cloud systems, because they’re better at pinpointinglocation data. The industry as a whole is moving towards using device-based location services, said Dizengof. With the cloud, 911 contact centers can more easily connect to mobile devices and pinpoint granular location data automatically, down to which floor someone is on inside of a building.
Migrating 911 to the cloud also opens up new avenues for citizens to communicate with first responders. In many large-scale emergencies ordinary citizens often share photos and videos via social media, but have no way of providing this information to first responders. “It goes to Twitter, goes to Facebook. The most important people that should get this information, 911, police officers, are not getting this information,” said Dizengof. Instead, officers themselves turn to social media to understand what’s going on. Cloud-based software changes this by enabling citizens to communicate with emergency services via text or video in real time.
In some cases, providing citizens with the ability to communicate with 911 via text or video can be lifesaving.
“We had a kidnap situation where a wife was being held hostage by her own husband with the gun, and in this situation you're not even able to communicate verbally,” said Dizengof. But by communicating with 911 via chat and video, the wife was able to explain her situation and show authorities exactly where her husband was. Armed with the location of both the wife and husband, a SWAT team was able to storm in and capture the husband while the wife ran to safety.
While there are benefits to upgrading analog telephone networks to the cloud, there are also certainly disadvantages that come along with depending on any cloud service. Operating over the public internet can make 911 systems more susceptible to cyberattacks or downtime when there are internet outages. Even a simplecoding errorcan prevent thousands of people from reaching 911.
Next-generation 911In the future, cloud-911 backers believe that additional capabilities such as AI, natural-language processing and automation will make 911 even more responsive, allowing dispatchers to more accurately route calls, provide automated responses where appropriate or group similar incidents.
Despite the challenges of legacy 911 systems and the promises of the cloud, in public safety circles, there is still a fair amount of resistance to the cloud.
The public safety community is very conservative, both Dizengof and Abley said, which means emergency departments aren’t the first to jump on new technologies. “It's just resistance to change and new technology, and in my opinion, very outdated concepts of security,” said Abley. “For example, most of our systems in the public safety area are not exposed to the public internet.”But there are good reasons for this more cautious approach. “With internet companies, we can move fast and break things and we can burn through a lot of venture capital and come up with cool stuff,” said Abley. “That's not really okay when it's something a firefighter needs to rescue you.”Unlike tech companies, emergency services departments can’t afford to make mistakes when migrating to the cloud.
Firefighters, for instance, who use radios to communicate with dispatchers when entering burning buildings, “trust their jurisdiction to operate a very reliable system that is 99.999% reliable,” said Abley. While updating those radios to cutting-edge technology sounds nice, it can be extremely risky to do in an industry where there’s no margin for error.
As the world modernizes its technology at a dizzying pace, emergency services remain an arena where there needs to be a bent towards safety and security, even at the risk of using outdated technologies. “It's a very critical system,” said Dizengof. “It's the most critical infrastructure a county could have and the most critical information source.”Despite the hesitation, adoption of cloud-based emergency contact software is actually increasing. “We're seeing more and more PSAPs adopt these technologies. We're seeing this becoming a standard,” said Dizengof.
It may take time, but like enterprise companies, Abley thinks public safety will eventually become less wary of the cloud.
“Seven or eight years ago, you had big companies suspicious of the cloud, of cloud services. They aren't anymore, but they were,” he said. “And public safety is always culturally a few years behind, technologically speaking.”Aisha Counts (@aishacounts) is a reporter at Protocol covering enterprise software. Formerly, she was a management consultant for EY. She's based in Los Angeles and can be reached at acounts@protocol.com.
The 'new normal' in startups was never normal'The Wilds' is a must-watch guilty pleasure and more weekend recsReport: Larry Ellison joined call about contesting 2020 electionWhy the digital transformation of industries is creating a more sustainable futureMicrosoft censored sensitive Chinese search topics, even in the U.S.
Coinbase is hitting back at crypto hatersCoinbase is hitting back at crypto hatersGoogle turns down the heat in App Store billing battleReport: Larry Ellison joined call about contesting 2020 electionTo give you the best possible experience, this site uses cookies. If you continue browsing. you accept our use of cookies. You can review ourprivacy policyto find out more about the cookies we use.
