old id = 4478
'The Confessions': What if All Your Secrets Went Public? A Story by | WIRED
1200
https://www.wired.com/2017/08/the-confessions

The Great Tech Panic: What If All Your Secrets Became Public Information?Dear Monica—that’show you start a letter, with a salutation, I’d almost forgot.
Monica, my dear, my love, my girl woman pony heart—I’ve written you a letter! On paper! With pen! A letter!!!(How many exclamation points do I have to use nowadays to come off as normal???)Hope you can read my scribbles.
Now I know what you’re thinking: You’re thinking that if I’ve gone to all the trouble of cursiving and sending you a Marriott Marquis stationery/Marriott Marquis ballpoint letter all the way from the middle of my business trip to New York, I must have something serious, something grievous, to tell you, because letters are for serious grievous occasions, like Latin is for funerals.
In my mind, I can see you sitting down now, green couch, den, and preparing yourself with a breath to hear that I’ve been diagnosed with over 70,000 incurable rare cancers, or that I’m leaving you for someone else, but don’t worry. Or do worry, but about yourself: Because while I’m fairly sure that I’m in decent health, I’m just as certain that, at the end of this, you’ll be the one leaving me.
OK. My computer. It seems as if my computer has been hacked and all the crap on it, or all the crap related to all the accounts related to it, or whatever—everything I’ve ever done on it—has been made public.
I was alerted to this fact by a phone call from HR—apparently, the attack has struck throughout the company. Striking most of management too, along with all the road reps. I’m just putting that out there, the extent of the attack, not so as to evade responsibility by spreading guilt or victimhood around but just as reassurance, to reassure you more than myself: I’m not alone.
We’re not.
It’s all out there, all of us now: not just my company emails and files but my personal emails and files, all our chat logs together, our banking.
I’m sorry, Monica, I apologize. You’re about to find out many things.
I love you. That’s the most important thing. That I love you and our life together. That I love what we have very much. I see your face every night when I shut down my head, in a new bed in a new room in a new hotel, wherever the company gets a discount. Your voice is the sound that every morning wakes me.
But sometimes I just lose it. I’m ashamed, but I do.
It happens when I’m too far out, when I’ve been gone for an extended stretch and everything like a dream just fades away for me.
I forget who I am, what joy I have.
I have sex with other women. This has never happened in LA, only on the road, and there is never any emotional involvement on my part. The sex is always safe. Or mostly safe. I promise to get tested.
Better that you find this out from me than online.
You don’t want to go online, Monica, you don’t want details. It sounds perverse, I know, but: Trust me.
I will never cheat on you again. Or even be in contact with these women. I will go, alone or with you or both, to counseling of your choosing. And I will stop taking Modafinil (Provigil), and I will stop posting on men’s rights subreddits (under all my names). All of that brute shit I wrote about your parents I didn’t mean. And I will repay the money, about $70,000, which I took from the 401(k). I never did make those investments. And what investments I did make failed.
I’m currently on the phone, on hold, trying to cancel the Visa.
And now I’m off—to figure out how to contain that other damage: the professional damage. I want to keep my job. I want to keep my wife. I’ll be back in LA by Wednesday, this letter should land there by Mon or Tues. How many times have you reread it already? Or is it shredded? If you prefer that I don’t come home, just say so, but don’t email. Tie a ribbon that isn’t yellow to the front yard oak and I’ll stay away—Monica, I’ll check every day until it’s gone.
Loving you,AustinChairman Comstock:Thank you, General. Thank you. I’m going to go ahead and take the liberty of speaking for all of the folks on the Committee and say that I appreciate your hauling up here to be with us today during what’s still very much an [unintelligible] time. We’re very much obliged, sir.
And now we’ll have the testimony of—Dr. Mira Latesco.
[Testimony of Dr. Mira Latesco, CSIS, Presidential Cyber Commission]Dr. Latesco:Chairman Comstock,Ranking Member Brevin, and Members of the Special Committee, I am grateful for the invitation.
The threats that beset the world’s technological infrastructure, to say nothing of our mutual humanity, are dire, diffuse, immense in scope, and rapidly evolving. As the guardian and guarantor of the bulk of that infrastructure, the United States of America must bear a corresponding bulk of the responsibility for determining a plan of defense and establishing the protocols of a recovery.
In the statement that follows I have laid out recommendations for both. But before I continue I would like to stress that, in preparing my recommendations, I have preferred to regard what General Plaudite has just characterized as “an attack” and “a terrorist act” simply as “an event” or “phenomenon,” and that I have done so due to the apparently scattershot—or, better, global—nature of its destruction. As the effects continue to proliferate—devastating governments, businesses, and individual lives—so too does the range of potential causes, rendering any investigation into origins, especially into a unitary origin, fraught if not ultimately futile.
Indeed, having just endured the General’s conjecture, I feel compelled to state for the record that, in my opinion, neither North Korea, nor China, nor Russia—whether acting alone or coordinating their efforts—would have been capable of perpetrating an assault on this scale, not least because all of their own internal networks have also been significantly impacted. Meanwhile, those countries and others, including even our allies in Europe, have aired their suspicions of our natsec state, but as Directors Spents and Grayle have testified—and we must take them at their word—their agencies’ intranets were breached prior to the malware leak that so exacerbated the situation.
In sum, then, I would like to remind this Committee that to declare this myriad phenomenon terrorism, and to seek to assign responsibility for it to a single nation, or even to a colluding group of nations, and/or to a collaboration of intelligence services, and/or internet service providers, and/or internet corporations, would essentially be to accuse some of the most powerful and profitable entities on this planet of a crime that required their own suicide. Which is a strange, even inconceivable, notion, and yet no more strange or inconceivable than the Vice President’s decision to broach the specter of an “alien” or “extraterrestrial enemy.” Those remarks, which he has since retracted, are as perfect an embodiment as any of the current chaos.
It is my hope, here and now, to allay this chaos by realigning the terms of the debate. In order to avoid levying more wild allegations against insufficient adversaries—which will only provoke and lead us into wars of more conventional weapons—we must ask some basic questions: Can the harm that is even now being done to us be stopped? Can it be reversed? And what are we to do—if our way of life online is to be restored, in any form resembling what it once was, or in another form yet to be determined—to ensure that a catastrophe like this never happens again?Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Latesco follows.]7/4/20XX:Last Sunday at twilight, we were clamoring down in the van from the retreat—which had been so inspiring: a week of prayer and spiritual exercises, a week of disconnection from the world and reconnection to God—and the moment we were off the mountain and onto the paved road through the hills, we entered the zone of signal, the zone of service, and all our phones lit up. The van was vibrating with messages. We’d been in Eden, and then, suddenly, we weren’t anymore. As if we’d sinned. We were flooded with news of the leak.
7/5:The diocese is in an uproar, and everyone’s coming to me for advice. About how to advise the laity about dealing with this. About how, never whether, we in the clergy should go about purifying our own online profiles. I’ve become a chaplain to the chaplains. This is because I’m the junior priest, I’m the youngest, and the older priests are disposed to associate youth with technological expertise. They’re lost, they claim, in this new computerized age, and they presume, because I can’t grow a beard, that I am not. But I am. We’re all lost. We’re all lost together.
7/7:I meditate, as I must, on my own foibles: on what’s now known, or knowable, about me. And what torments me the most, I’ll admit, aren’t the embarrassing things I’ve written and remembered, but the embarrassing things I’ve written and forgotten. What I wrote to my parents about Father Emry’s bad breath and body odor, what I wrote to the Bishop about the substandard fare at the Ignatian Center, my lamenting the flagrant plagiarism of homilies (which was, unfortunately, and despite the denials, an accurate lament), my anger about being disciplined for talking during Ordination Mass (though I was just talking to a fellow seminarian who will remain nameless, telling him to quit fussing with his phone): I had no memory of most of the slights. And so I would never have known, if not for this humiliation, what I had to atone for. Going forward, I’ll never again be unable to know what I’ve done that commands my repentance. This is good news. This is the newest gospel.
7/8:This crisis most resembles, because it most perverts, the sacrament of Confession. Such unprecedented exposure is like a coerced Confession: It’s as if the practice has been imposed upon everyone, not just Catholics. Sins have been admitted to, or just disclosed, both venial and mortal, but this admission, because involuntary, is without contrition. Rather, people are feeling contrite not because they’ve committed the sins but because their commission of sins is now conspicuous. People regret not what they did but that other people have become aware of it. This is why the seal exists: The priest must keep whatever he is told in Confession sealed in utmost confidence, not, as I’d previously assumed, so as to protect the confessor’s privacy but, as I’m realizing lately, so as to enable the confessor to experience guilt about having engaged in the acts themselves. To enable him to feel this guilt in his heart, and not merely exhibit all the exterior signs of mortification and remorse as a reaction to public pressure.
7/1:Throughout our Scriptures, God has interfered, He’s meddled. Why not so now? What happened? We priests often get a version of this question, and we often get it from the children at Sunday school. I didn’t have an answer until recently. For people wary of darkness, God revealed Himself as light. For people wary of famine, God revealed Himself as an edible tree. For people wary of drought, God revealed Himself as water and flooded His Creation. Why, then, would God not reveal Himself to us in wires? In wirelessness? I believe this leak to be a miracle. I believe that for the Church to survive, this must be deemed a miracle. If transparency is but materialist revelation, can we not regard what has been revealed as an indication of our souls’ yearning for God, if not of the presence of God Himself? For what or who else is He, if not the sum total of what we have always sought to keep from one another?Chairman Comstock:Thank you,Dr. Latesco, for such a thorough presentation. I’ll now yield time to myself.
I wanted to circle back to what you were saying before, about how it’s going to be—futile, you said, for us to pin down who’s responsible for—what did you call it? This transparency? Would you mind explaining why?Dr. Latesco:At the risk of venturing into guesses and fictions.
Chairman Comstock:Indulge me.
Dr. Latesco:If I must, Mr. Chairman.
To begin with, then, let us concur with the current expert opinion that all of this began on what we have been referring to as the dark web—that part of the web not indexed by search engines, which traditionally has trafficked in hacked information: stolen bank information, stolen social security numbers, and so on. Then, let us propose that at some point, some unidentifiable point, caches of other files started appearing there too—files comprised of logs of search histories and browser activities. Say that all of these caches had been obtained in phishing operations, and say that all of the phishers bought and sold these caches, sometimes to each other, and sometimes directly to illegitimate, and even legitimate, online advertisers and retailers.
It was only a matter of time before this trade in the logs of sites that we visited and keywords that we searched came to the attention of more sophisticated criminals, parties acting independently or on behalf of a state or states that brazenly went about stealing and ransoming this information. They were stealing this information for blackmail. They threatened to make this information public if certain sums of cryptocurrency were not received. Simultaneously, there appear to have also been bots pursuing something similar: Not only were they targeting users so as to take their logs, and their email and social accounts, hostage, they were also intervening in the ransom chains by stealing that information from the bots that had stolen it initially. Sometimes the subbots ransomed this information back to the primary bots, sometimes they auctioned it to sub-subbots—to whomever or whichever was the highest bidder or bounty consortium, whether human or virtual, usually virtual.
Concurrent with this advance, the caches began their migration from the dark web to the light.
Imagine it like this: Imagine a black market of information that went public, becoming essentially a black stock market of information, which, with increased speculation and automated trading, crashed.
It was this crash, or, if you prefer, this transparenting—this transference of hacked data from illicit obscurity onto the publicly accessible web—that wreaked the major havoc. Vast exabytes of this compromised and compromising data were being indexed by search technology and so were affecting search results.
Each of us rushed to get whatever we could on everyone else, even while we all attempted to close our own accounts. To erase our tracks. To delete our traffic. To blank our lives. Only to realize that that was impossible.
The sheer amount of this so-called private data—the financial data stolen and stored on the dark web, in combination with the contents of users’ email and social accounts—so overwhelmed the amount of so-called public data that the public was overwhelmed, the public was corrupted.
This is why I believe that we are going to have to surrender all hopes of assigning fault. Rather, this is why I believe that even if we were able, due to some unimaginable fortuity or technological breakthrough, to determine who, or what entity, was to blame for this phenomenon, even if we all just decided to blame someone or some entity, without any evidence, without any proof not of our own manufacture, we would never be able to convince the public of our findings. We probably would not even manage to convince a majority of our own citizens.
An atmosphere of doubt now surrounds our every interaction, a sense of the total absence, or total inapplicability, of common truth, which is so fundamental to the functioning of our democracy.
I am convinced that this undermining of the very concept of truth will emerge as the gravest effect of this disaster.
RANKING MEMBER BREVIN:I’d be interested— [crosstalk]Chairman Comstock:The Chair recognizes Ranking Member Brevin.
RANKING MEMBER BREVIN:I’d be interested, Doctor, in what you think we’re here for? I find it insulting that you’d come before this Committee, which has been charged with uncovering the truth, only to impugn that very mission. Only to lecture us about how the truth is worthless.
Dr. Latesco:I never said that truth is worthless. I just said that truth is— [crosstalk]RANKING MEMBER BREVIN:Obsolete?Dr. Latesco:Mr. Ranking Member,I share your frustration. Banks have collapsed. Exchanges have collapsed. The American divorce rate has risen by 33 percent in the last quarter. The state of Kansas has cycled through three governors in a period of six months. Though if you read your news online you will be told that the divorce rate has risen by 500 percent, and gangs now rule Topeka.
Many of you in this chamber will be brought up on charges. Many of you will not win reelection. That is, if the ballots can still reliably be counted.
I understand what you are feeling. That is just about the only thing I understand, this feeling of being helpless. You do not know what to do, because you do not know what to credit. All you have in lieu of facts is what I have just given you, which is the same as what I give my son at bedtime—a story.
RANKING MEMBER BREVIN:Come again?Dr. Latesco:One story and then lights-out.
To Whom It May Concern::I, Staff Sgt. Jerome Madden, 3XX MP, US Army Reserve, of the city of Oakland, Alameda County, California, do hereby swear and affirm that not everything about me is TRUE. I am NOT a monster and NOT an addict and NOT a domestic abuser of my GF, by which I mean there are people who can do what I’ve done, there are people who can do even just some of what I’ve done, and not bethat person.
When my buds Luther and Cal told me to search up my name, search up their names, or any, I was like WTF? How did they get my pizza orders? And did I even know how much TV I’d pirated? Compared to them, to Luther and Cal, I did very little on the internet. Very little.
But there it is: the record of my traffic, beeps and flickers. This, now, is all you can know. After I’m gone, it’s all anyone will have to go on.
You now know that I’ve gambled myself into debt (poker), that on 1/2/20XX at 3:23 am I searched up “panties” on Amazon, and at 3:25 am “5 pack womens trimmed lace boy short panties” on Amazon, and that at others times I’ve searched up “Abu Ghraib” and “is infidelitous a word,” and then that I went once and visited a site that offered up tips on taking better selfies and adoptasnake.com. But that’s it. That’s all. If you judge a man strictly by his doxing, he’s going to seem fucking nuts. You’ll know what he did but you won’t know why. You’ll never know his thinking.
My thinking: that the fear I’ve come to have of technology is the fear that my parents had of God. The fear of a God Who knows everything. A God Who sees and hears everything, including their thoughts, and Who before they sinned was expecting their sins and already readying their punishments.
Dad, Mom, I wish I remembered how you prayed.
God please help me stay offline. God please help preserve me, hold me, and keep me from searching up the intel, going through the lives of everyone I know.
God please prevent me from ever thinking that anything I find out about my family and friends means anything about them, by recalling to me that anything they find out about me means nothing about me. Or to me.
I forgive Martha for sleeping with Thom (I understand), I forgive Thom for sleeping with Martha (but I forgive Martha more), I forgive Luther for being such a racist pigfucker, I forgive Cal for lying to me about the overhaul work on the Mustang, I forgive Cal and Luther both for blowing the whistle on me when I went AWOL—I was always wondering who that was, who blew me.
All the other sins that were sinned against me are forgotten. Anyway, I’ll be dead soon.
About my own transgressions. In the course of my military service I was from time to time present at and involved with interrogations in which undue force was used. That force wasn’t just undue but illegal, as was my subsequent chronicling of it, though I only performed that chronicling for myself. As I wait for the pills to take hold (Oxy, 30 pills @ 40 mg each, so 1200 mg, and a fentanyl patch on each bicep), I find that I’m laughing. I have the taste in my mouth of metal and laughing. It’s ridiculous to me, this situation. It’s ridiculous to me that the type of torture I was involved with, though we didn’t call it torture, was, the moment it became public, deemed counterproductive and discontinued. It turned out that kidnapping someone whom you suspected of having information pertaining to imminent violence, hooding and gagging and injecting him with a dose of sedatives just cruelly short of lethal, transporting him to a foreign locale and there beating him out of his unconsciousness until you obtained that information, was a false methodology that produced false results. It produced false confessions. Which we always knew. We who’d actually engaged in it. We’d talk about this privately. About how if you strike a man, he will lie to you. How if you punch and kick a man about his head, if you deprive him of sustenance and sleep and then attempt to drown him, with the first gasp of air he gets, he’ll say anything. He’ll tell you anything you want. But if you give a man some incentive, like a smoke or a beer or a meal, if you give him free email and movies to download and unlimited porn and eternal storage up on the cloud, then purely as a result of his greed, his pure curiosity and greed for existence, he will tell you everything. He will tell you everything he’d ever intended to keep hidden and secret from even himself. And he will do this inadvertently. He won’t even realize his betrayal.
At least I didn’t. And now it’s too late.
God and the blessed Mary ever-virgin, our Lord Jesus Christ, grant me peace.
Joshua Cohenis the author of six books, includingBook of NumbersandMoving Kings.
This is his first piece forWIRED.
This article appears in the September issue.
Subscribe now.
illustrations by zohar lazar. lettering by braulio amado.
