old id = 1631
DNA Mechanics | Annual Review of Biomedical Engineering
1953
https://doi.org/10.1146%2Fannurev.bioeng.6.062403.132016

DNA MechanicsDNA MechanicsAnnual Review of Biomedical EngineeringVol. 7:21-53 (Volume publication date 15 August 2005)https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.bioeng.6.062403.132016Craig J. BenhamUC Davis Genome Center, University of California, Davis, California 95616;email:[email protected]Steven P. MielkeBiophysics Graduate Group, University of California, Davis, California 95616; and Biomedical Division, L-448 Biosciences Directorate, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, California 94551Abstract▪ AbstractWe review the history of DNA mechanics and its analysis. We evaluate several methods to analyze the structures of superhelical DNA molecules, each predicated on the assumption that DNA can be modeled with reasonable accuracy as an extended, linearly elastic polymer. Three main approaches are considered: mechanical equilibrium methods, which seek to compute minimum energy conformations of topologically constrained molecules; statistical mechanical methods, which seek to compute the Boltzmann distribution of equilibrium conformations that arise in a finite temperature environment; and dynamic methods, which seek to compute deterministic trajectories of the helix axis by solving equations of motion. When these methods include forces of self-contact, which prevent strand passage and preserve the topological constraint, each predicts plectonemically interwound structures. On the other hand, the extent to which these mechanical methods reliably predict energetic and thermodynamic properties of superhelical molecules is limited, in part because of their inability to account explicitly for interactions involving solvent. Monte Carlo methods predict the entropy associated with supercoiling to be negative, in conflict with a body of experimental evidence that finds it is large and positive, as would be the case if superhelical deformations significantly disrupt the ordering of ambient solvent molecules. This suggests that the large-scale conformational properties predicted by elastomechanical models are not the only ones determining the energetics and thermodynamics of supercoiling. Moreover, because all such models that preserve the topological constraint correctly predict plectonemic interwinding, despite these and other limitations, this constraint evidently dominates energetic and thermodynamic factors in determining supercoil geometry. Therefore, agreement between predicted structures and structures obtained experimentally, for example, by electron microscopy, does not in itself provide evidence for the correctness or completeness of any given model of DNA mechanics.
Key WordsDNA topology,DNA supercoiling,DNA modeling,equilibria,dynamicsTHE EARLY HISTORY OF DNAThe central role of DNA in biological processes was first demonstrated by Oswald Avery, who showed that DNA is the molecule that carries genetic information (1). This observation motivated the investigation of DNA structure, which culminated in 1953 in Watson & Crick's model of DNA as a double helix (2). In this model, the molecule was posited to be composed of two sugar-phosphate backbones, with one of four nitrogenous bases (A, C, G, or T) attached to each sugar. Each backbone had a (5′-3′) chemical directionality, with the two strands oriented in an antiparallel manner. Each base on one strand was complementarily paired with the opposing base on the other strand, A with T and G with C. The sequence of bases along the molecule encoded the genetic information, so complete information could be recovered from either strand. Although crystal structures of DNA were not available until 1979, considerable indirect evidence quickly suggested that the Watson-Crick model was essentially correct. So for the first 25 years of the investigation of DNA structure, the molecule was regarded as a uniform, straight, right-handed double helix with 10 base pairs per turn.
The Large-Scale Structure of DNADNA was originally assumed to be a linear molecule. It was commonly isolated in linear form, although the techniques by which it was extracted from cells were sufficiently crude as to fractionate the molecule into relatively short fragments. Eukaryotic chromosomes, which were known to both appear and genetically map as linear arrays of genes, were thought each to contain a single, linear DNA molecule. So it came as a surprise when Jacob & Wollman found the genetic map of the bacteriumEscherichia colito be circular (3). This circular structure was soon directly confirmed by electron microscopy (4), and a number of other naturally occurring DNAs, in particular, viral genomes and bacterial plasmids, were found also to be circular (5,6). Later work has shown that the DNA within chromosomes is partitioned into loops, called topological domains, which are constrained in a manner functionally equivalent to circles, as is described below. So circularity, in fact, is an essentially universal attribute of all biologically active DNAs, at least at some stages in their life cycles.
It was quickly appreciated that circularity introduces a significant constraint on DNA. Vinograd & Lebowitz were the first to understand the nature of this constraint (7). (The history of this discovery is described in Reference8.) To close a DNA molecule into a circle one must join the ends of the strands. Because the strands have antiparallel orientations, and because the directionality of each strand must be conserved, each strand can only close by binding its ends together. So the circular molecule has a structure comprised of two interlinked circles. The alternative, that the end of each strand binds to the other strand to form a Moebius strip, is chemically forbidden. So a closed circular molecule is constrained by the constancy of its linking numberLk. If one strand is cut while the other remains continuously circular, the linking number no longer remains constant. This is the nicked circular structure. The loops within chromosome domains also have constant linking numbers because duplex rotations are forbidden at points of loop attachment.
The precise nature of the constraint imposed by circularity was first described by Vinograd & Lebowitz (9). The constancy of the linking number in a closed circular DNA (ccDNA) couples its large-scale supercoiled (tertiary) structure and helical duplex winding according to the equationThe mathematics underlying this relationship was investigated independently by several mathematicians. The linking number was first defined by Gauss, apparently in an unpublished analysis of the orbits of asteroids (10).
Lkis expressed as a double integral over the pair of curves (for DNA the two strands of the duplex), having a form called a Gaussian integral, shown inEquation 2below. Calugareanu first examined a relationship similar toEquation 1above, although he was considering differential geometric attributes of a single closed curve with nowhere vanishing curvature, not a pair of curves (11). The integral geometry underlying Calugareanu's formula was further developed by Pohl (12). In 1969, Jim White, in his doctoral dissertation, presented the relationship given inEquation 1and examined it in its full mathematical generality in any number of dimensions (13). The connection of this mathematics to DNA, which had been empirically discovered by Vinograd & Lebowitz in 1966, was only made from the mathematical side in 1971 by Fuller (14).
Each of the three quantities,Lk,Tw, andWr, has attributes not shared by the others (15). The linking numberLkassociated to a ccDNA is an integer topological invariant;Lkis fixed as long as both strands remain covalently closed. In contrast, bothWrandTware geometric invariants, whose values can vary as the covalently closed DNA is continuously deformed.
Wris an attribute of the central axis curve of the DNA, whereas bothTwandLkare properties of the pair of strands of the duplex. And most importantly, bothLkandWrare interactive parameters; their values may be computed either by crossing algorithms or by Gaussian double integrals. Ifs1ands2parametrize the positions along strands 1 and 2 of the duplex, the tangent vectors to the strands at these positions areT(s1andT(s2)e(s1,s2) is the unit vector pointing from positions1tos2, andr(s1,s2) is their separation distance, then the linking number is given by the Gaussian double integral:In what follows, three types of circular molecules need to be distinguished. In nicked circular molecules, one strand is a covalently continuous circle and the other has been cut. So although the molecule appears circular, the constraint imposed byEquation 1is not operative. The relaxed state of a closed circular DNA is a phenomenologically defined condition in which the molecule is as unstressed as possible, given closed circularity. The linking number characterizing the relaxed state is denotedLk0. IfLk0is not an integer, the relaxed state is not precisely attainable by any closed molecule. A closed circular DNA is said to be superhelical if its linking numberLkdiffers from the relaxed value. Its superhelicity is described by the linking difference. From any superhelical state, a single strand cut produces a nicked circle, and a double strand cut produces a full-length linear molecule.
Lk, and hence superhelicity, is closely regulated in many organisms. Negative superhelicity is seen in most organisms, although some that live at high temperatures have positive superhelicities. Patterns of gene expression are known to change with superhelicity, which gives this phenomenon considerable biological importance.
Supercoiled DNA molecules can be sorted according to their linking numbers using gel electrophoresis. Otherwise identical molecules whose linking numbers differ by one migrate at different velocities, and hence can be distinguished (16). In this way, populations of molecules having identical linking numbers can be isolated. Two chemically identical circular DNA molecules that have the same value ofLkare said to be topoisomers.
When superhelical DNA is examined microscopically, it is found to be essentially always plectonemically interwound, with some proportion of branched structures (17,18). This interwound configuration, an example of which is shown inFigure 1, was said to be supercoiled because the winding involved was of a higher order than the duplex winding of the Watson-Crick helix itself. (The term superhelicity formally refers to the topological constraint, whereas supercoiling refers to the tertiary structures that are observed in superhelical molecules.)When the DNA is coated with RecA, its effective thickness increases, allowing one to distinguish over-crossings from under-crossings. This allows one to determine the writhing numbers of these molecules. If they are taken from a fully characterized population that is topologically identical (and hence all have the same superhelicity), one knows bothLkand α. So fromEquation 1, one can inferTw, which is otherwise difficult to measure directly.
Electron micrograph (EM) data can be used to assess population averages of a variety of parameters of DNA supercoils, including branch number, average supercoil diameter, andWr. However, the relationship of these results to solution conformations is not clear. In preparing samples for the electron microscope, the DNA is adsorbed on a surface where it experiences large spreading forces, then it is dried and coated with metal. These drastic manipulations could make the resulting configurations unrepresentative of the shapes of the DNA when free in solution. Certainly the observed structures are not projections onto a plane of the solution structures, as they must preserve length. However, small angle X-ray scattering and cryoelectron microscopy, which probe solution structures, both also find interwound conformations (19,20). So the interwound geometry itself is quite robust, although the parameter distributions found by analyzing populations of EM images may not be representative of the solution properties.
The Energetics of DNA DeformationsInvestigations of DNA energetics proceeded in parallel with analyses of its structure. Because DNA was initially assumed to be linear, the first associations of energetics with deformations involved only bending deformations. These focused on assessing the thermal equilibrium behavior of long, unconstrained molecules subjected to random thermal motion. Twist was not considered because it was not regarded as relevant to this process. Once it was realized that DNA could be superhelical, so that twisting and bending were coupled byEquation 1, more complex models were introduced.
The two major classes of such models are the Gaussian chain (or random-walk) and the wormlike coil. The Gaussian chain model divides the molecule intonuncorrelated segments of lengthlr, such that the mean square end-to-end distance,〈R2〉, is given byIn 1958, Landau & Lifshitz (26) proposed an explicitly elastic model to analyze thermal fluctuations of linear molecules. The polymer was regarded as a threadlike elastic curve, with constant length and zero thickness, making it analogous to the Kratky-Porod wormlike coil. Its unstressed shape was regarded as straight, with energy required for bending. If the curvature at positionsis κ (s), then the free energy density needed to bend the DNA to that curvature is quadratic,Landau & Lifshitz explicitly described the bending energy in their model as a Helmholtz free energy. This was justified by the fact that molecules in their model, having no thickness, have effective volumes equivalent to their constant lengths. The Landau-Lifshitz approach has been extended to cases in which the system volume is not necessarily constant, but the temperature and pressure are assumed to be so, i.e., the bending energy in these cases is equated with a Gibbs free energy (28–30).
Gray & Hearst (28) first evaluated the enthalpic and entropic contributions to the free energy of bending. They showed that for a linearly elastic polymer that is bent to uniform curvature κ, a plot ofversuswill be linear, with slope corresponding to, the enthalpy of bending per unit curvature squared per unit length, and intercept corresponding to, the entropy of bending per unit curvature squared per unit length. Using a relation derived in Reference23, Gray & Hearst estimated the Kuhn length as a function of temperature from sedimentation data, and thereby evaluated the enthalpy and entropy of bending to be (28)In the first such analysis, the molecule was regarded as being linearly elastic, and hence endowed with a full set of elastic parameters—two bending stiffnessesA1andA2, and one torsional stiffnessC(31). The unstressed state of the molecule was taken to be straight, with a helical twist rate of 10 base pairs per turn. If κ1(s) and κ2(s) are the curvatures in the principal directions as functions of positions, and τ (s) is the helical deformation density there, then in linear elasticity the energy associated with this conformation in a molecule of lengthLisIn the first analyses of this type, the DNA was regarded as a superhelically constrained circular molecule, with the mechanical properties of a homogeneous, isotropic, linearly elastic, mechanically symmetric (i.e.,) rod (31–33). These assumptions embodied the simplest elastic properties and conformed to the then-current view that unstressed DNA had a uniform, straight, helical structure. As more precise information became available, it became clear that both the unstressed shape and the mechanical properties (i.e., elastic parameters) in fact could vary with base sequence. Moreover, more complex energy laws, including stretch and shear, and the possibility of terms coupling bending and twisting, were also considered. This work is described in the following sections.
The assumption of linear elasticity has a more precise justification. If DNA is a conservative system, it will have energies associated with deformations. One may expand the local energy density in a Taylor series as a function of the generalized coordinates, and τ (s), setting the zero point to correspond to the undeformed structure. Because the undeformed structure has minimum energy, the zeroth and first-order terms in the Taylor series vanish, so the lowest order terms are quadratic. The original linearly elastic model results when one only considers these terms, and there are no cross terms. Although the deformation energies may in fact also have higher order terms, which would make DNA nonlinearly elastic, their evaluation would require measuring higher order effects.
When DNA crystal structures became available, it was immediately clear that the actual structure of the molecule varies somewhat with base identity and near neighbors. One could surmise that other parameters, including those describing the mechanical properties, may also be sequence dependent. Unfortunately, many of the methods available to measure bending or torsional stiffnesses of DNA yield averages over substantial lengths (the persistence length, in the analysis leading toEquation 8). Although one can infer a sequence effect if experimental results for AT-rich and GC-rich DNA differ, it is difficult to determine the precise sequence specificity of the stiffnesses from such experiments.
An effective torsional stiffness was first measured by Barkley & Zimm using fluorescence depolarization (34). Here a fluorescent dye is intercalated into the DNA, and the molecule is illuminated with polarized light at a wavelength absorbed by the dye. Any change in the orientation of the dye between absorption and fluorescent emission is observed as a depolarization. The extent of this depolarization can be used to estimate a torsional stiffness. This method assumes that the dye's motion is a faithful reflection of the torsional fluctuations the DNA would experience in the absence of the dye. And the value measured is the average over all sequence positions at which intercalation occurs.
This procedure found torsional fluctuations of 5 to 7 degrees between neighbor base pairs, which showed DNA to be a remarkably flexible molecule. Rather than having a well-specified interpair helical twist of approximately 34 degrees, at room temperature the actual value fluctuates between 28 and 40 degrees, and one third of the time it undergoes excursions beyond those limits. Fluctuations of this magnitude are occurring simultaneously for all base pairs. Clearly, the rigid picture of DNA structure resulting from X-ray crystallography is an artifact of that method. The actual molecule is vastly more flexible.
A second method to measure the DNA torsional stiffness uses ring closure probabilities (35,36). Here a short, nicked circular DNA molecule containing a known numberNof base pairs is constructed.
Nis chosen so the unstressed twist of the molecule is not integral. Then a ligase enzyme is introduced. This closes the nicks, producing closed circular molecules having integer linking numbers. Because closure requires torsional fluctuations that either overtwist the molecule to the next higher (integer) value ofLkor undertwist it to the next lower value, the ratio between these two topoisomers in the resulting population will depend on the effective torsional stiffness. (By using short molecules bending effects are excluded.) A succession of molecules is generated, each of which is one base pair longer than its predecessor, and the fraction of molecules with each linking number is measured for each lengthN. The results permit the evaluation of a sequence average torsional stiffnessCof the DNA. Values ofCfrom this procedure range from 300–400 pN nm2.
More recently, mechanical parameters have been obtained from micromanipulation experiments in which the ends of single DNA molecules are attached to micron-scale beads held with magnetic or optical “tweezers" or micropipettes. This arrangement allows individual DNA molecules to be stretched, twisted, subjected to magnetic fields, or immersed in hydrodynamic flows. Force and extension measurements, and comparisons of bead motions with expected magnetic or hydrodynamic behavior, permit assessment of a wide range of properties, such as bending, torsional and entropic elasticity, and characterization of both responses to enzyme action and transitions to unusual forms induced by extreme stresses (37–41). For example, Bryant et al. (42) have directly measured a DNA torsional stiffness by observing the rotation of calibrated “rotor" beads attached to twisted and stretched molecules near a site-specific nick. They measured a stiffness ofpN nm2, 40% to 50% higher than that obtained from topoisomer distribution experiments. The authors note that this discrepancy may be due either to the high tension imposed on the molecules in their experiments or an inability of previous experiments to adequately constrain writhing degrees of freedom. This illustrates the fact that because single-molecule micromanipulation assays are not likely to sample the same ensembles of structures explored by molecules in their in vivo environments or in solution, mechanical or thermodynamic parameters obtained from these studies are not necessarily directly applicable to physiological DNA.
The only method that explicitly derives sequence-dependent mechanical properties involves the analysis of the deformations of DNA structure in cocrystals with protein molecules (43). This approach provides information on deformability at the atomic level, which is considerably more detailed than what is possible using other approaches. However, it assumes that the deformations imposed on DNA by binding proteins are a faithful reflection of the deformations the molecule would undergo if it were free in solution.
If transient nicks are introduced into circular DNA molecules their linking numbers can change. If this process comes to equilibrium it will generate a population distributed around the relaxed state (16,45). These topoisomer distributions have been shown to be effectively Boltzmann (i.e., Gaussian), although once closed the molecules only take on integer values. The mean of this distribution gives the linking number of the relaxed state, and from the variance one can determine the free energy of superhelicity. This procedure, called the Gaussian centers method, only evaluates the free energy around the relaxed state.
Sufficient negative DNA superhelicity can drive local transitions to other secondary structures whose right-handed helicities are smaller than that of the B-form helix. If the energetics of the transition involved are well understood in linear molecules, a quantitative analysis of the extent of transition in a range of topoisomers allows one to evaluate the free energy associated to superhelicity (46). This procedure evaluates the free energy of superhelicity around the stress levels that drive transitions, which usually occur at substantially negative linking differences. As topoisomer transition data can be gathered at different temperatures, this procedure has been used to evaluate the temperature dependence of the free energy of superhelicity.
The first two methods find the free energy of superhelicity to be essentially quadratic in the linking difference α, with a coefficient that is inversely proportional to molecular length:The transition competition method has been used to evaluate the free energy of superhelicity at a variety of temperatures (46). This enabled ΔG(α) to be decomposed into its enthalpic (ΔH) and entropic (ΔS) contributions asSo all available experimental data indicate that the entropy of superhelicity is large and positive. This contrasts with the negative entropy of DNA bending found by Gray & Hearst (28). It also stands in opposition to the entropy values derived from theoretical analyses of the large-scale structure of superhelical DNA, as is described below. These uniformly find a negative entropy, consistent with the increasingly constrained set of interwound tertiary structures available to incrementally superhelical molecules.
METHODS TO ANALYZE THE STRUCTURE OF SUPERHELICAL DNAThere are three qualitatively different approaches to the analysis of the structure of superhelically constrained DNA. In all cases, one regards the DNA as having an unstressed conformation, deformations away from which require energy. At increasing levels of refinement, these attributes can be regarded as sequence dependent. The first method proposed for analyzing superhelical DNA sought the mechanical equilibrium configuration, which is the minimum energy configuration of the topologically constrained molecule (31–33). This has the advantage of being a relatively tractable problem. However, mechanical equilibria may not be fully representative of the actual behavior of superhelical DNA. At finite temperatures, random thermal motion drives molecules into higher energy configurations. So equilibrium in this case is a distribution among all available states, with high energy states exponentially less occupied than low energy states. The second class of methods uses statistical mechanics to analyze superhelical DNA structure by either calculating or simulating this distribution. In this view, the mechanical equilibrium configuration corresponds to the structure the molecule would have atK. These methods elucidate the behaviors of populations of molecules at equilibrium at ambient temperatures; however, they do not say anything about the dynamics of deformations in DNA or the rates at which individual molecules move among the states. Further, both of these approaches calculate equilibria. If the DNA is not at equilibrium their results may not be useful. For this reason, dynamic methods also have been developed. Here we briefly describe each approach.
Mechanical Equilibrium MethodsThese methods calculate the minimum energy configuration of a topologically constrained circular DNA molecule, the constraint being the constancy of its linking number. Mathematically, a set of local coordinates is embedded in the polymer at each positionsalong its central axis. The shape of the molecule at mechanical equilibrium is calculated by finding the orientations of these local coordinates with respect to a fixed set of lab coordinates, as functions ofs.
The first approach, based on Kirchhoff rod theory, modeled the DNA as a homogeneous, isotropic, linearly elastic rod that is straight when unstressed (31–33,50,51). It also assumed no external forces or torques were imposed on the molecule. This method formally calculates the shape of the elastica curve, which is the central axis curve of the rod. Only deformations of curvature and of twist were permitted. Under these conditions it was shown that the mechanical equilibria were toroidal helices. The stability of these equilibria initially was not assessed.
This approach has been extended and refined in a variety of ways. The system of local coordinates and the parametrization of the coordinate transformation can be chosen in different ways to suit specific purposes. The first approach used the mechanically determined principal axes of each cross-section, and described the coordinate transformation using Euler angles. However, the Euler angle transformation has an inherent singularity that can be removed by using instead Euler parameters. Other approaches based on differential geometry use the Frenet frame as local coordinates and the curvature and torsion as transformations. Shi et al. (52) showed that use of cylindrical local coordinates enabled closed-form solutions to be found, even in a considerably more general formulation.
Elastic equilibrium analyses using more detailed models of DNA have been presented. Sequence dependence of the unstressed DNA structure has been included (53). A recent extension also incorporates sequence dependence of the deformation energies, as estimated from crystal structure data (54). An elastic rod model in which the DNA is regarded as explicitly double helical also has been introduced (55). The set of allowable deformations has been expanded to include shear and extension, in addition to twist and bending (52). This has the important practical effect of allowing more highly deformed states to be analyzed than are possible with elastica-based theories, where the curvature must be so gradual that the finite diameter of the rod, and hence shear effects, can be ignored.
Regarding stability, LeBret showed that, in the initial elastica theory, as the superhelicity decreased away from zero the mechanical equilibrium initially remained a planar circle, with all the deformation partitioned to twist (56). However, as the deformation was continued a bifurcation occurred to writhed conformations (57). This behavior had been independently discovered in analyzing hockling of submarine cables (58). A finite element analysis has shown that this bifurcation behavior is stringently dependent on the precise unstressed shape of the elastic rod (59). If there is a single kink in an otherwise straight rod, the bifurcation occurs earlier, while the presence of two kinks can lead to different twisting behaviors in the two regions of the circle they bound. Interestingly, if the DNA is regarded as naturally curved, forming an O-ring when unstressed, the bifurcation to writhing does not occur. Instead, the molecule immediately deforms to a writhed state as soon as any linking difference is imposed. Maddocks and coworkers have made an exhaustive bifurcation analysis of the equilibrium configurations available to a superhelical DNA, as a function of α (60,61). They assume the molecule can pass through itself, so self-contacts do not occur. They again find large families of mechanical equilibrium structures as mechanical and bifurcation parameters are varied. All are approximately toroidal helical structures.
When superhelical circular DNA is examined microscopically, it is found to be essentially always plectonemically interwound, with some proportion of branched structures (17,18). Small-angle X-ray scattering and cryoelectron microscopy, which probe the solution structure, also find interwound conformations (19,20). This leads to an apparent discrepancy between the observed structures and the predictions of mechanical equilibrium analyses.
This problem is resolved when one notes that the models used to calculate mechanical equilibria assume no externally imposed forces or torques on the DNA. When the molecule comes into self-contact, each side of the contact point exerts a force on the other, so the assumption of no external forces implicitly excludes self-contacts. The precise conclusion of these analyses is that, in the absence of self-contacts, the only equilibria are toroidal. Because superhelical DNA in fact is interwound, not toroidal, it follows that these so-called plectonemic structures are stabilized by the forces of self-contact that they experience. In their absence, interwound structures would not be equilibria.
Several groups have extended the mechanical approach to include forces of self-contact. This was done initially using finite element methods (62). Later, contact forces were successfully incorporated into a rigorous analysis of the elastic stability of superhelical DNA configurations (63,64). These analyses show that in the presence of self-contacts, the equilibria are indeed interwound. This conclusion has important implications, which are presented below.
Statistical Mechanical MethodsAt finite temperatures, random thermal motion will cause a molecule to sample states whose energies are above the absolute minimum. So the equilibria that occur are statistical distributions in which a population of identical molecules samples all possible states, with the relative frequencies of two states varying exponentially with their energy difference. In practice, one must make drastic simplifying assumptions before either this approach or the dynamics approaches, examined below, become tractable. Even if one assumes the molecule has no cross-section, but instead is a mathematical closed curve with smoothly varying curvature and helicity, the problem remains intractable, for several reasons.
First, because the curvature and twist are specified at each point, the state space is infinite dimensional. One cannot allow curvature to vary arbitrarily because the molecule must remain topologically closed circular. It is an unsolved problem of differential geometry to determine which curvature and torsion functions are consistent with smooth closure, so the configuration space of allowable curvature functions is not known.
Second, although the twisting energies and constraints are harmonious, those relevant to bending have fundamentally different characters. Specifically, the total twistTwis an extensive parameter, found by integrating the twist density τ (s) as shown inEquation 3. The energy of twisting is also extensive, given in the linear elastic case by integrating an expression in the same intensive parameter τ (see the twist part of the integral inEquation 9). In contrast, the conformational constraint relevant to bending deformations is the writhing numberWr. Being an inherently interactive parameter, given by a Gausssian double integral, it bears no simple relationship to any intensive parameter, such as the curvature κ (s). Yet the bending energy, which is the energy associated to changes of tertiary structure, is an extensive parameter of the intensive curvature. So the writhing constraint on tertiary structure and the energy density associated to deformations of tertiary structure have fundamentally different characters.
For these reasons, calculations of structures and energetics are not tractable for conformations of superhelically constrained DNA molecules having smoothly varying curvatures and twists, other than the mechanical equilibria. So various simplifications are required, which we describe in sequence. First, in both statistical and dynamic models, the infinite dimensionality of the state space is resolved by assuming the molecule consists of a finite number of straight segments joined by flexible joints of some type. Energy of bending is then associated to the angles between neighbor joints. As there are a finite number of joints, the state space for bending is now finite dimensional. There are a variety of such models.
The crudest is a statistical segment model in which the length of each segment is the Kuhn segment length and the joints are universal joints, so there is no energy associated to the intersegment angles. To understand the limited relevance of this class of models, note that a sufficiently long, linearly elastic polymer under random thermal buffeting will assume a random coil conformation whose effective diameter equals the Kuhn segment length. A few moments of drawing random coils with pencils, then trying to approximate them with a set of statistical segments of equal total length, each the diameter of the coil, will convince one of the inability of such models to accurately represent conformations of continuously varying polymers. Calculation ofWris particularly problematic. Because neighbor segments do not cross in projection, they make no contribution toWr. So, in this model, points can only contribute toWrif they are more than approximately three persistence lengths (i.e., 150 nm) apart! One anticipates that this would lead to a substantial underestimate of the writhe of a smoothly varying molecule.
One can also approximate the smooth curve of an elastic polymer by a sequence of shorter segments, with a quadratic energy associated to bending the inter-segment angle away from straight. By varying the segment length and number so the total length is fixed, and also varying the bending stiffness (i.e., the coefficient of the quadratic) in synchrony, one can model with successively better refinement—even taking it to the continuum limit. The hydrodynamic properties of linear, flexible polymers can be approximated by assuming the segments are in fact beads.
In these segment-based models of superhelical DNA, the discordance between parameter types is handled as follows: The writhing number of each configuration is calculated first. This is subtracted from the assumed linking difference, and the difference is ascribed to twist. In the early models this twist was assumed to be uniformly distributed, and the quadratic energy associated with it was calculated. This approach allows bending to fluctuate, but twist must instantly equilibrate without fluctuations. This effectively allows bending to occur at finite temperature, but constrains twisting toK. Recent approaches have corrected this simplification (65–67).
Jointed chain, bead, or continuum models can be used to calculate attributes of equilibrium distributions for linearly elastic polymers with free ends (22,23,27,68–70). However, these methods encounter substantial difficulties when the molecule is topologically constrained. So investigators instead use Monte Carlo methods (71,72), which sample the thermal equilibrium distribution instead of calculating it exactly.
The basic Monte Carlo strategy involves two steps. One starts the molecule in a current stateCwhose energy isEc. Then one selects a new stateNhaving energyEn. Finally, one determines whether to stay in the current state or move to the new state. This is done iteratively, and a distribution is built by periodically sampling the current state.
Two conditions must be met for this procedure to converge to the equilibrium distribution. First, the state selection step must not introduce any bias. This requires that it satisfy two subconditions, ergodicity and detailed balance. Ergodicity requires that every state can be reached from any current state, either directly or by a finite sequence of steps. That is, if one constructs a directed graph of all allowable choices of new state that can be made, for all initial states, ergodicity requires the result to be a connected digraph with every point accessible from any other point by a path consisting of directed edges. Detailed balance requires that the processs of selecting the new state be unbiased. Specifically, letp(N|C) be the probability of selecting new stateN, given one is in current stateC. Then detailed balance requires that, for all statesAand. Satisfying detailed balance can be surprisingly difficult, as is shown below. The second requirement for faithfully sampling an equilibrium distribution is that once the new stateNhas been chosen, the decision whether to stay inCor move toNmust be consistent with equilibrium statistics. The following Metropolis criterion is most commonly used. If, move to the new state N. Otherwise, choose a random numberruniformly distributed on the closed interval [0, 1]. If), move toN; otherwise, stay inC. In their classic paper, Metropolis et al. (73) showed that if the selection step satisfies ergodicity and detailed balance, and if the Metropolis decision criterion is used, then the distribution generated will asymptotically converge to the equilibrium distribution.
Unfortunately, in practice the rate of convergence of this method can be difficult to determine, and is often exceedingly slow. In that case, several remedial steps can be taken to decrease the correlations between successively sampled states. One can build one's distribution by performing multiple iterations of the above two-step process before selecting the next sample state. If this does not suffice, supplementary selection steps can be introduced that are designed to more rapidly move through the configuration space. However, these also must satisfy ergodicity and detailed balance.
The condition of detailed balance can be especially difficult to satisfy. For example, suppose that in current stateCthere arencpossible choices of new state, each of which may be selected with equal probability, 1/nc. Although this would seem a safe criterion, in fact it will violate detailed balance unless every state has the same number of possible choices. To see this, consider the state space inFigure 2, in which four states are denoted by vertices A, B, C, and D, and the possible choices of new state are shown as edges between pairs of vertices. Note that vertices B and C have three connections, whereas vertices A and D have only two. If one is currently in state A, there are two choices of new state. If one chooses either at random, the probability of choosing state B is. But if one is in state B there are three possible choices of new state. If one again chooses at random from among them, then. So this simple and seemingly fair criterion actually violates detailed balance unless all states have the same number of possibilities. From this example one sees that satisfying detailed balance can require a careful analysis of the connectivities within the entire state space.
The most extensive application of the Metropolis Monte Carlo method to the analysis of superhelical DNA has been made by Vologodskii et al. (72), who model the molecule as a chain of segments that is closed into a topological circle. A quadratic bending energy is associated with deviations from straightness of each angle between successive segments, and theapproximation for twist energy is made, as described above. Two types of trial motions are used to select the new state from the current one, as shown inFigure 3. In the crankshaft move (Figure 3A) two vertices are selected at random, and the subchain they bound is rotated through angle φ around the axis joining them. Here φ is chosen at random, uniformly distributed in the interval. As this move can result in strand crossings, it has the potential to change the topological type of the molecule. As long as this is regarded as allowable, this crankshaft move will satisfy detailed balance but may not conserve topology. If topology is to be conserved, then some rotation angles may be forbidden for specific pairs of vertices. Care must be taken in the design of this move to assure it does not violate detailed balance.
The second trial motion is reptation, in which two disjoint subsections of the chain are exchanged as shown inFigure 3B. Here one chooses two vertices at random (e.g.,V1andV2in the figure), and selects for exchange the disjoint subchains they bound. The lengths of these subchains can also be chosen at random, confining oneself to small values. InFigure 3B, the 3-subchain bounded by [] is to be exchanged with the 4-subchain bounded by []. Once the subchains to be exchanged are identified, the interior angles of each are uniformly either increased or decreased so they span the gap to which they will be moved. Only pairs of subchains in which each member can fit into the gap left by the other can be exchanged. Starting in any state, one chooses the pairs of subchains to be exchanged randomly and with equal probability from among all possibilities.
If any subchain could be moved to any other position, reptation (if carefully implemented) would satisfy detailed balance because every state would have the same number of possible choices. Because this is not the case, this reptation move violates detailed balance. To see this, consider the two states shown inFigure 4, where a 4-chain is exchanged with a 3-chain. The essence of the problem is that not all 4-chains may be possible choices. If the gap created by removing a 4-chain is greater than 3L(Lis the length of a segment) then no 3-chain can span it. So the possible choices are only those 4-chains whose end-to-end distances do not exceed 3L, the number of which can vary from one state to another. In stateAofFigure 4there is exactly one 4-chain whose gap is small enough to be spanned by a 3-chain. If there areNsegments in this molecule, then there areN−6 choices of 3-chain, and one 4-chain, that can be exchanged. If each choice has equal probability of selection, then, where stateBis shown in the figure. In stateB, however, there are four different choices of 4-chain whose ends are close enough to be spanned by a 3-chain, and for each of these there aredifferent 3-chains that could be selected. So if each choice has equal probability then. As, this reptation move violates detailed balance. Therefore, this implementation of the Monte Carlo method cannot be regarded as converging to the equilibrium distribution.
Vologodskii et al. (72) found that the crankshaft move alone generated a smaller fraction of branched supercoiled structures than what was observed experimentally. So they introduced the reptation move to raise the frequency of branching to that seen in electron micrographs (EM). But EM sample preparation requires the DNA to be spread on a planar grid, which may cause the conformational characteristics of a population, and in particular its branching frequency, to differ from those achieved in solution. So it is not clear that EM provides the best experimental comparisons for these purposes. CryoEM, which does not suffer this disadvantage, may prove to be better suited.
Hearst & Hunt (74) have applied a wormlike coil method to estimate the distribution properties of highly supercoiled DNA. They restrict consideration to simple plectonemes, which are interwound supercoils without branches. With this restriction they find that the molecule persists in a highly restricted condition in which its configurational entropy is greatly reduced. This suggests that the molecule may not wander far from its mechanical equilibrium configuration. If correct, this indicates that the results of mechanical equilibrium calculations may provide reasonable approximations of the conformational attributes of DNA at finite temperatures.
The Monte Carlo method of Vologodskii et al. (72) has been applied to evaluate by simulation a wide variety of conformational, energetic, thermodynamic, and/or hydrodynamic properties of superhelical DNA. Despite the formal problem this method has with satisfying detailed balance, its accuracy in evaluating conformational parameters (superhelix geometry, axis length, writhe, even knot-type frequencies) has generally been reasonably good. However, it has been less successful at assessing the thermodynamic parameters associated with DNA superhelicity. In particular, all statistical analyses of superhelical DNA performed to date find a negative entropy, consistent with the constraints imposed by plectonemic interwinding. The enthalpy of superhelicity, which has sometimes been identified with the elastic energy (72,75), is calculated to be less than its free energy. These results strongly conflict with all experimental data, which measure a large enthalpy and a large positive entropy associated with superhelicity. If the entropy of superhelicity were negative, the free energy of supercoiling would increase with increasing temperature; the molecule would become stiffer. The opposite behavior is seen in practice. This discrepancy suggests that the large-scale configurational properties of supercoils, as found by these strictly elastomechanical models, do not dominate their energetics. Instead, superhelically driven changes in smaller scale attributes of molecular structure, such as the interactions between the DNA and the solvent, may play significant, even dominant, roles in determining the thermodynamics of this phenomenon.
Dynamic MethodsDynamic methods calculate deterministic, time-dependent trajectories of the helix axes of individual DNA molecules by either numerical or analytical integration of the equations of motion. If this can be done over sufficiently long times, which are well beyond the scope of currently available methods, an individual molecule will sample its accessible states with a distribution that asymptotically converges to the equilibrium distribution of a population. Dynamic methods, like every other method that includes the possibility of self-contacts, find that superhelical DNA assumes interwound supercoiled configurations.
Numerical methods for simulating dynamic fluctuations in superhelical DNA have been widely implemented. In this section, we summarize several of the principle approaches that have been taken. To date, these methods have been employed predominantly to simulate “equilibrium" dynamics in which closed, initially circular structures with specified linking differences, constrained byEquation 1, collapse to more stable interwound forms. More recently, fully dynamic, nonequilibrium scenarios have been explored. In such scenarios, which are likely more representative of in vivo events that involve DNA supercoiling, ΔLkitself varies dynamically in response to external processes, such as torsional loads imposed by bound proteins.
This framework permits time steps larger than those available to traditional molecular dynamics (MD) schemes (100 femtosecond steps are taken in the simulations reported in References76,77), but requires setting γ, the “collision frequency" characterizing molecular damping and stochastic forcing owing to coupling with the heat bath, in a manner that freezes high frequency vibrational modes. This obscures the connection between numerical and physical times, leading to simulated motions estimated to be at least three orders of magnitude faster than “real" motions; simulations spanning nanoseconds in numerical time are proposed to correspond to dynamics occurring in microseconds of physical time (77). (The effect of varying γ upon supercoiling dynamics within this framework is fully explored in Reference79.) This method has been used as described above to obtain energy-minimized conformations and to simulate equilibrium dynamics. As in the Monte Carlo work described previously, the generated structures were compared with electron microscopy data, with which they were deemed to be consistent. Results reported in Reference78, which investigates the effects of salt concentration upon folding pathways, suggest that tightly interwound conformations are favored at in vivo and higher ionic strengths. This conclusion is in qualitative agreement with experimental results (19), but conflicts with predictions of statistical methods, which, as discussed above, account only for configurational contributions to the entropy.
This approach applies the equations of motion explicitly only to the finite set of vertices, then constructs the full molecular axis curve at each time step by B-spline interpolation from the vertex positions. This procedure need not conserve topology. (An example of this behavior is shown in Reference77, where a trefoil knot arises from an initial planar circle.) Any procedure involving calculations at a finite set of node points and interpolation of a curve will be guaranteed to conserve topology only if explicit tests for self-crossings are made at each time step.
Extensions of this work (e.g., References88–90) have investigated the effects of static bends, DNA-protein interactions, and external loads (see below) upon supercoiling dynamics. Because it assumes motions to be overdamped as a starting point, this method fails to resolve dynamics on timescales smaller than a few picoseconds.
Recently, Mielke and coworkers (90) have invoked a BD bead-chain formulation to simulate the dynamic twin-supercoiling of a 477 bp region of topologically constrained B-DNA in response to an applied torque of magnitude comparable to that exerted byEscherichia coliRNAP during transcription (40,96). These simulations successfully capture the salient features of twin-domain formation, and illuminate a number of general features characterizing the dynamically driven supercoiling of a torsionally relaxed domain, including (a) superhelical stress manifests principally as torsional deformation at early times, as imposed twist propagates through the structure; (b) thereafter, an approximately constant amount of evenly distributed twist is maintained, and additional imposed stress manifests as a slow rise in writhe, until localized buckling results in plectonemic supercoiling; (c) the introduced stress continues to be apportioned approximately exclusively to writhe, resulting in additional supercoiling; until (d) the structure ultimately reaches mechanical equilibrium with the torsional load, and writhe too is maintained at a level approximately constant on average out to late times. These results demonstrate the feasibility of dynamically modeling, within a framework that approximates physiological conditions, nonequilibrium scenarios in which superhelicity itself is time-dependent.
CONCLUSIONS AND OPEN QUESTIONSDeterminants of Superhelical DNA StructureAll the mechanics-based models of superhelical DNA structure developed to date, as long as they do not exclude self-contacts, predict interwound conformations. This is equally true of analyses of stable mechanical equilibria, dynamics of fluctuations or of introduced supercoils, or statistical mechanical analyses—even those that cannot be said to converge to the equilibrium distribution. This uniform conclusion also agrees with virtually all experimental data on solution or EM conformations of superhelical DNA. This strong concordance stands in stark contrast to the predictions of thermodynamic parameters made by these same theories, some of which find entropies associated to superhelicity that have both wrong magnitude and opposite sign from their experimentally measured values. One might conclude that, although the existing mechanics-based theories of DNA structure accurately capture conformational information, they do not reflect the real energetics underlying superhelicity. To propose a resolution of this discrepancy, we first consider the assumptions implicit in these analyses.
All the models developed to date make large simplifications regarding the actual structure of DNA. In some cases, the molecule is modeled as a succession of straight segments, or as beads, with bending confined to the joints between them. In other analyses, specifically those of mechanical equilibrium, much more detail can be incorporated. DNA can be regarded as continuously deformable with an explicitly helical structure, and sequence variations of both structure and mechanical properties can be included. But even these conditions greatly simplify the actual structure of DNA, which experiments find to be a highly flexible molecule. There are six single covalent bonds between the phosphorous atom on one base and that of its nearest neighbor, five of which allow unrestrained rotations in the absence of steric clashes. At the atomic scale this allows many degrees of freedom that are not included in any existing mechanical analyses of DNA structure. Moreover, interactions with the aqueous solvent are very important determinants of DNA structure that also are not explicitly considered. Indeed, the primary factor stabilizing the double helix is base stacking to exclude water. And DNA orders the water molecules in its immediate neighborhood. Some of the closest water molecules, found in the grooves of the helix, occur so uniformly at specific positions that they appear in crystal structures (so-called crystallographic water). Then the grooves are filled with partially ordered water, which participates in the motions of the molecule and may impart to it more symmetric mechanical properties than the structure of the double helix would suggest. Further out there are hydration shells of partially ordered water around the DNA helix that fade with distance into bulk solvent. Small changes of local DNA conformation may cause large changes in the ensemble of states that the water molecules can assume in response. For these reasons solvent (and ionic) effects are very important determinants of DNA structure that can profoundly influence the thermodynamics, and particularly the entropy, associated to DNA deformations. None of these factors are explicitly included in existing models of DNA structure or mechanics.
All the mechanics-based analyses of DNA structure and superhelicity, whether mechanical, statistical, or dynamic, use experimentally measured values for the mechanical and structural parameters of DNA. However, there are disagreements regarding the precise nature of these mechanical properties, the bending and torsional stiffnessses, and hence also of the elastic and superhelical energies determined therefrom. Is elastic energy an internal energy, that is an enthalpy, or is it a free energy? Landau & Lifshitz (26) and Gray & Hearst (28) assume the latter, whereas other investigators assume the former. Although we do not propose a resolution, we note that each measured stiffness is a single number that is distilled from an experiment in which the DNA and its entrained ions and hydration shells are sampling a very large number of conformational microstates. Thus the measured stiffness is not a property of a single conformation, but of a distribution among states. So, for example, to measure an effective bending energy associated to a particular value of curvature, one in fact is finding some sort of ensemble average over all states of the DNA, water, and ions that is consistent with that amount of overall curvature. Because the accommodation of the ions and solvent to this conformational change are included, this suggests that the bending energy one finds should contain entropic terms; it should be a free energy.
To our knowledge, only the experiments of Gray & Hearst (28) have investigated how the bending stiffness of linear DNA is partitioned between entropic and enthalpic components. No comparable information is available regarding the DNA torsional stiffness. In this regard, single-molecule experiments will only help if they deform the DNA in a manner comparable to that in which it is deformed in solution. And to evaluate free energies, these deformed states must differ infinitesimally from equilibrium throughout whatever deformation is imposed.
All theoretical analyses that have considered the question have found the entropy of superhelicity to be negative, whereas all experiments find it to be positive. We suggest that this discrepancy arises because these analyses do not determine the full entropy, but only the configurational entropy of supercoiling. They use a highly simplified, jointed segment model of DNA structure in which only its large-scale conformation is explicitly examined, and that often in a simplistic way. It is intuitively clear that interwound DNA is constrained to sample a more confined set of states than is relaxed DNA. So the configurational entropy of plectonemic supercoiling is expected to be negative, as all calculations have shown that it is. But the fact that the experimentally determined entropy of superhelicity is positive clearly indicates that these large-scale deformations are not the primary determinants of the thermodynamics of superhelicity. This reinforces the view that full understanding of superhelical DNA mechanics and energetics will require much more explicit, atomic-scale models.
And yet, all theoretical analyses performed to date correctly predict interwound structures. This occurs despite the fact that the models used are simplistic, do not correctly reproduce the governing thermodynamics, and in some cases even appear to contain errors. Moreover, the experimental evidence regarding the structure of superhelical DNA in solution also points to interwound structures. Clearly interwound conformations must be very robustly stable structures to be so virtually universal.
We suggest that the occurrence of interwound structures is determined more by topology than by energetics or mechanics. To see this, note that, if the DNA duplex were able pass through itself it would changeLkby ± 2, depending on the sign of the passage. So suppose the DNA has some conformational preference for the relaxed state, the nature of which is not now specified. IfLk≠Lk0, the relaxed state is not attainable, although the molecule will still strive to reach it. Thus for example, at linking difference, the molecule will be found in a figure eight shape because it strives to make the single self-crossing that would return it to the relaxed state. Because this self-crossing is topologically forbidden, the molecule abides in this configuration. At more negative linking differences the molecule simply interwinds further because more self-passages are required to reach the relaxed state.
This scenario is consistent with the conclusion from linear mechanical analyses that it is the forces of self-contact which stabilize interwound structures. Yet the same scenario would occur under much more general conditions. Virtually any hyperelastic mechanics, linear or otherwise, homogeneous or sequence dependent, symmetric or not, would produce the same qualitative behavior, provided the minimum energy state was relaxed. Indeed, one may speculate that even dissipative models would give much the same behavior. At the most extreme, suppose there were no enthalpy associated to DNA deformations at all, and the only driving factor was the configurational entropy. Because this is negative, the resulting free energy of superhelicity would be positive. So configurational entropy alone could drive DNA toward the relaxed state, which can only be achieved by self-passage. Because this is topologically forbidden in a ccDNA, the molecule will tend to occur predominantly in states of self-contact, which will be interwound supercoils.
If this view is correct, then interwound configurations would result virtually regardless of what mechanical and energetic properties DNA might have. So agreement between the predictions of a model and experimental results would not by itself constitute strong evidence for the correctness of that model. However, if the model correctly predicts more detailed attributes of the distribution of interwound states that may vary among models (such as branching frequency, average supercoil diameter or axis length, distributions betweenTwandWr, etc.), such agreement could be viewed as corroborative.
acknowledgmentsThis work was supported in part by grants DBI 99-04549 and 04-16764 from the National Science Foundation, and RO1-HG01973 and RO1-GM68903 from the National Institutes of Health, and by additional support from the Diversa Corporation. S.P. Mielke, whose work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by the University of California, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, under Contract No. W-7405-Eng-48, acknowledges the University of California, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and UC Davis, for continuing support through the Student Employee Graduate Research Fellowship (SEGRF).
TheAnnual Review of Biomedical Engineeringis online athttp://bioeng.annualreviews.orgliterature citedThe History of Microbiology—A Personal InterpretationProgress, Challenges, and Surprises in Annotating the Human GenomeMechanisms of DNA Uptake by Naturally Competent BacteriaThe Inherent Asymmetry of DNA ReplicationStress-Induced Mutagenesis: Implications in Cancer and Drug ResistanceIt Seems Like Only YesterdayRemembrance of Immunology Past: Conversations with Herman EisenCapsules of Streptococcus pneumoniae and Other Bacteria: Paradigms for Polysaccharide Biosynthesis and RegulationDiscovering DNA Encodes Heredity and Prions are Infectious ProteinsA Microbial Genetic JourneyTHE STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF SMC AND KLEISIN COMPLEXESChances and Choices: Cold Spring Harbor 1944–1955Hundred-Year Search for the Human GenomeCELL-CELL COMMUNICATION IN GRAM-POSITIVE BACTERIAExpanding Archaeal Diversity and Phylogeny: Past, Present, and FutureThe History of Microbiology—A Personal InterpretationThe Roots of Genetic Coding in Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetase DualityVirus Structures by X-Ray Free-Electron LasersBiophysical Techniques in Structural BiologyAn NMR View of Protein Dynamics in Health and DiseaseProgramming Structured DNA Assemblies to Probe Biophysical ProcessesFrom Bacteriophage to Plant GeneticsMapping Genes Is Good for YouSomatic Mutagenesis in Mammals and Its Implications for Human Disease and AgingStructural DNA Nanotechnology: Artificial Nanostructures for Biomedical ResearchThe Inherent Asymmetry of DNA ReplicationSharing Data to Build a Medical Information Commons: From Bermuda to the Global AllianceEpigenetic Regulation: A New Frontier for Biomedical EngineersThe Discovery of Reverse TranscriptaseAdvancements in Next-Generation SequencingThe Thermodynamics of Marine Biogeochemical Cycles: Lotka RevisitedHistone H3 Variants and Their Chaperones During Development and Disease: Contributing to Epigenetic ControlDNA and Other Strands: The Making of a Human GeneticistFun and Games in Berkeley: The Early Years (1956–2013)Miller-Urey and Beyond: What Have We Learned About Prebiotic Organic Synthesis Reactions in the Past 60 Years?Advances, Interactions, and Future Developments in the CNS, Phenix, and Rosetta Structural Biology Software SystemsSuper-Resolution in Solution X-Ray Scattering and Its Applications to Structural Systems BiologyTorque Measurement at the Single-Molecule LevelStructure Unifies the Viral UniverseApplication of High-Throughput DNA Sequencing in PhytopathologyOrigins of Specificity in Protein-DNA RecognitionNanomaterials Based on DNAMacromolecular Modeling with RosettaSingle-Molecule Studies of RNA Polymerase: Motoring AlongLessons Learned from Studies of Fission Yeast Mating-Type Switching and SilencingPhysics of ProteinsDiscovering DNA Encodes Heredity and Prions are Infectious ProteinsWanderings of a DNA Enzymologist: From DNA Polymerase to Viral LatencyTracking Topoisomerase Activity at the Single-Molecule LevelSTRUCTURAL INSIGHTS INTO TRANSLATIONAL FIDELITYTHE STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF SMC AND KLEISIN COMPLEXESMEDICAL GENETICS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIESSIMULATION OF DNA-NANOTUBE INTERACTIONSThe Role of Water in Protein-DNA RecognitionThe Impact of the Completed Human Genome Sequence on the Development of Novel Therapeutics for Human DiseaseDNA PrimasesA Century of Plant Pathology: A Retrospective View on Understanding Host-Parasite InteractionsDNA Replication FidelityLEGAL, ETHICAL, AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN HUMAN GENOME RESEARCHEUREKA! AND OTHER PLEASURESSUBTRACTIVE CLONING: Past, Present, and FutureA REWARDING RESEARCH PATHWAYChances and Choices: Cold Spring Harbor 1944–1955The French School of Genetics: From Physiological and Population Genetics to Regulatory Molecular GeneticsA Journey in the World of DNA Rings and BeyondA Journey in the World of DNA Rings and BeyondHow Tumor Virology Evolved into Cancer Biology and Transformed OncologyTracking Topoisomerase Activity at the Single-Molecule LevelStress-Induced Structural Transitions in DNA and ProteinsStructure, Molecular Mechanisms, and Evolutionary Relationships in DNA TopoisomerasesA Journey in the World of DNA Rings and BeyondTracking Topoisomerase Activity at the Single-Molecule LevelCLUES AND CONSEQUENCES OF DNA BENDING IN TRANSCRIPTIONSTRUCTURE, DYNAMICS, AND FUNCTION OF CHROMATIN IN VITROElastic Properties of Nucleic Acids by Single-Molecule Force SpectroscopyRheology of the CytoskeletonMODELING AND SIMULATION OF BIOMATERIALSFrom 50 Years Ago, the Birth of Modern Liquid-State ScienceQUANTUM CHAOS AND COMPLEXITY IN NUCLEIFLEXIBILITY OF RNASIMULATION OF DNA-NANOTUBE INTERACTIONSMolecular Dynamics Simulation of Nucleic AcidsFLEXIBILITY OF RNAMechanisms of DNA Uptake by Naturally Competent BacteriaElastic Properties of Nucleic Acids by Single-Molecule Force SpectroscopyHypercomplex Liquid CrystalsRecent Advances in Magnetic TweezersMicroengineered Platforms for Cell MechanobiologyParticle-Tracking Microrheology of Living Cells: Principles and ApplicationsRecent Advances in Optical TweezersIn singulo Biochemistry: When Less Is MoreSingle-Molecule Micromanipulation TechniquesHigh-Resolution, Single-Molecule Measurements of Biomolecular MotionTracking Topoisomerase Activity at the Single-Molecule LevelSIMULATION OF DNA-NANOTUBE INTERACTIONSMODELING AND SIMULATION OF BIOMATERIALSNew DNA Sequencing MethodsCell Mechanics: Mechanical Response, Cell Adhesion, and Molecular DeformationStress-Induced Structural Transitions in DNA and ProteinsAdvancing Biophysics Using DNA OrigamiSingle-Molecule Studies of Protein Folding with Optical TweezersSingle-Molecule Force Spectroscopy of Transmembrane β-Barrel ProteinsStructural DNA Nanotechnology: Artificial Nanostructures for Biomedical ResearchThe Work of Titin Protein Folding as a Major Driver in Muscle ContractionÅngström-Precision Optical Traps and ApplicationsMechanisms of Cellular Proteostasis: Insights from Single-Molecule ApproachesMolecular Origin of the Hierarchical Elasticity of Titin: Simulation, Experiment, and TheoryMechanical Principles of Biological NanocompositesTheoretical Perspectives on Protein FoldingControlling Proteins Through Molecular SpringsSingle-Molecule Micromanipulation TechniquesDeciphering Molecular Interactions of Native Membrane Proteins by Single-Molecule Force SpectroscopyMODELING AND SIMULATION OF BIOMATERIALSSIMULATION OF DNA-NANOTUBE INTERACTIONSForce as a Useful Variable in Reactions: Unfolding RNAMechanical Processes in BiochemistryCell Mechanics: Mechanical Response, Cell Adhesion, and Molecular DeformationStress-Induced Structural Transitions in DNA and ProteinsElastic Properties of Nucleic Acids by Single-Molecule Force SpectroscopyTorque Measurement at the Single-Molecule LevelRecent Advances in Magnetic TweezersSingle-Molecule Views of Protein Movement on Single-Stranded DNAAdvances in Single-Molecule Fluorescence Methods for Molecular BiologyIn singulo Biochemistry: When Less Is MoreEngineering Approaches to BiomanipulationSingle-Molecule Micromanipulation TechniquesHigh-Resolution, Single-Molecule Measurements of Biomolecular MotionTracking Topoisomerase Activity at the Single-Molecule LevelProbing the Relation Between Force—Lifetime—and Chemistry in Single Molecular BondsCell Mechanics: Mechanical Response, Cell Adhesion, and Molecular DeformationStress-Induced Structural Transitions in DNA and ProteinsOPTICAL DETECTION OF SINGLE MOLECULESMechanical Protein Unfolding and DegradationÅngström-Precision Optical Traps and ApplicationsTorque Measurement at the Single-Molecule LevelRNA Polymerase Active Center: The Molecular Engine of TranscriptionSingle-Molecule Studies of RNA Polymerase: Motoring AlongSingle-Molecule Micromanipulation TechniquesThe Role of Mass Spectrometry in Structure Elucidation of Dynamic Protein ComplexesSINGLE-MOLECULE ANALYSIS OF RNA POLYMERASE TRANSCRIPTIONTracking Topoisomerase Activity at the Single-Molecule LevelBIONANOMECHANICAL SYSTEMSForce as a Useful Variable in Reactions: Unfolding RNAMechanical Processes in BiochemistryTemporal and Spatial Regulation in Prokaryotic Cell Cycle Progression and DevelopmentProbing the Relation Between Force—Lifetime—and Chemistry in Single Molecular BondsSingle-Molecule Arrays for Protein and Nucleic Acid AnalysisElastic Properties of Nucleic Acids by Single-Molecule Force SpectroscopyMechanics and Single-Molecule Interrogation of DNA RecombinationNanoconfinement and the Strength of BiopolymersBiophysical Dynamics in Disorderly EnvironmentsRecent Advances in Magnetic TweezersMechanosignaling to the Cell Nucleus and Gene RegulationSingle-Molecule Studies of the ReplisomeComplex Fluids: Probing Mechanical Properties of Biological Systems with Optical TweezersRecent Advances in Optical TweezersSingle-Molecule RNA ScienceStructure, Molecular Mechanisms, and Evolutionary Relationships in DNA TopoisomerasesForce as a Useful Variable in Reactions: Unfolding RNATorque Measurement at the Single-Molecule LevelRecent Advances in Optical TweezersSingle-Molecule Micromanipulation TechniquesTracking Topoisomerase Activity at the Single-Molecule LevelOrigins of Specificity in Protein-DNA RecognitionProtein-DNA Recognition Patterns and PredictionsThe Role of Water in Protein-DNA RecognitionThe Papillomavirus E2 Proteins: Structure, Function, and BiologyTorque Measurement at the Single-Molecule LevelA Journey in the World of DNA Rings and BeyondFirst-Passage Processes in the GenomeSingle-Molecule FRET Spectroscopy and the Polymer Physics of Unfolded and Intrinsically Disordered ProteinsComputer Simulations of Ion Transport in Polymer Electrolyte MembranesPolymer Fluid Dynamics: Continuum and Molecular ApproachesNeutron Scattering from Polymers: Five Decades of Developing PossibilitiesCentromeric Heterochromatin: The Primordial Segregation MachineUnraveling Reaction Pathways and Specifying Reaction Kinetics for Complex SystemsBoger FluidsSingle-Molecule FRET Spectroscopy and the Polymer Physics of Unfolded and Intrinsically Disordered ProteinsFirst-Passage Processes in the GenomePolymer Fluid Dynamics: Continuum and Molecular ApproachesNeutron Scattering from Polymers: Five Decades of Developing PossibilitiesCentromeric Heterochromatin: The Primordial Segregation MachineBoger FluidsMechanics and Prediction of Turbulent Drag Reduction with Polymer AdditivesConformational Dynamics and Ensembles in Protein FoldingIntramolecular Vibrations in Excitation Energy Transfer: Insights from Real-Time Path Integral CalculationsStochastic Vector Techniques in Ground-State Electronic StructureDiscrete Latent Variable ModelsCrystal Structure Prediction Methods for Organic Molecules: State of the ArtBayesian Inference: The Comprehensive Approach to Analyzing Single-Molecule Experimentsα-Crystallins in the Vertebrate Eye Lens: Complex Oligomers and Molecular ChaperonesSolving the Structure and Dynamics of Metal Nanoparticles by Combining X-Ray Absorption Fine Structure Spectroscopy and Atomistic Structure SimulationsGeometry and Dynamics for Markov Chain Monte CarloMarkov Chain Monte Carlo Methods for Bayesian Data Analysis in AstronomyNetwork Sampling: From Snowball and Multiplicity to Respondent-Driven SamplingFrom 50 Years Ago, the Birth of Modern Liquid-State ScienceDiagonalizing Transfer Matrices and Matrix Product Operators: A Medley of Exact and Computational MethodsItem Response TheoryBayesian Computation Via Markov Chain Monte CarloBuild, Compute, Critique, Repeat: Data Analysis with Latent Variable ModelsDensity of States–Based Molecular SimulationsBayesian Portfolio AnalysisWetting and Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Simple LiquidsMODELING AND SIMULATION OF BIOMATERIALSBAYESIAN ANALYSIS FOR POLITICAL RESEARCHKinetic Monte Carlo Simulation of Chemical Vapor DepositionSubnanoscale Studies of Segregation at Grain Boundaries: Simulations and ExperimentsExtending the Time Scale in Atomistic Simulation of MaterialsQUANTUM MONTE CARLO CALCULATIONS OF LIGHT NUCLEIMonte Carlo Methods in Electronic Structures for Large SystemsSIMULATION OF PHASE TRANSITIONS IN FLUIDSCHANNEL NETWORKSRESULTS FROM SHELL-MODEL MONTE CARLO STUDIESCOMPUTATIONAL STUDIES OF CLUSTERS:Methods and ResultsBIOMOLECULAR DYNAMICS AT LONG TIMESTEPS:Bridging the Timescale Gap Between Simulation and ExperimentationBIOMOLECULAR DYNAMICS AT LONG TIMESTEPS:Bridging the Timescale Gap Between Simulation and ExperimentationWhole-Cell Models and Simulations in Molecular DetailKinetics of Drug Binding and Residence TimeRealizing the Physics of Motile Cilia Synchronization with Driven ColloidsCrowding Effects on Diffusion in Solutions and CellsElastic Modeling of Biomembranes and Lipid BilayersMolecular and Mesoscale Simulation Methods for Polymer MaterialsTranscriptional Pausing as a Mediator of Bacterial Gene RegulationMultiscale Dynamic Structuring of Bacterial ChromosomesTranscription in Living Cells: Molecular Mechanisms of BurstingThe Clash of Macromolecular Titans: Replication-Transcription Conflicts in BacteriaDynamics of Bacterial Gene Regulatory NetworksRecent Advancements in DNA Damage–Transcription Crosstalk and High-Resolution Mapping of DNA BreaksTranscription as a Threat to Genome IntegrityChromosome-Membrane Interactions in BacteriaTranscription-Associated MutagenesisNew Mechanistic and Functional Insights into DNA TopoisomerasesTorque Measurement at the Single-Molecule LevelThe c-MYC NHE III1: Function and RegulationA Journey in the World of DNA Rings and BeyondEnzyme-Mediated DNA LoopingStructure, Molecular Mechanisms, and Evolutionary Relationships in DNA TopoisomerasesThe Excitement of DiscoveryDNA Topology-Mediated Control of Global Gene Expression in Escherichia coliSTRUCTURE, DYNAMICS, AND FUNCTION OF CHROMATIN IN VITROEnzyme-Mediated DNA LoopingMore AR articles citing this referenceEquation(s):Equation(s):Equation(s):Equation(s):Equation(s):Equation(s):Equation(s):Equation(s):Equation(s):Equation(s):Equation(s):Equation(s):Equation(s):Equation(s):Equation(s):Equation(s):Equation(s):Equation(s):Equation(s):Equation(s):Equation(s):Equation(s):Equation(s):Equation(s):Equation(s):Figure 1Branched, plectonemically interwound superhelical DNA [adapted from an electron micrograph of a seven-kilobase plasmid with α/Lk0= −0.027 (17)]. There are two branch points, indicated by asterisks. Overcrossings and undercrossings are indistinguishable.
Figure Locations...This interwound configuration, an example of which is shown in Figure 1, ...
...Figure 5 Schematic illustration of transcriptional twin-loop formation (adapted from figure 1 in Reference (94)). (a) A transcription ensemble, ...
Figure 2State space illustrating violation of detailed balance. The probability of moving from stateAto stateBis, but the probability of moving fromBtoAis.
Figure Locations...To see this, consider the state space in Figure 2, in which four states are denoted by vertices A, ...
Figure 3Trial motions employed in the Monte Carlo method of Vologodskii et al. (adapted from Reference72).
A. Crankshaft move. A section of the chain is rotated through a random angle, φ, about an axis connecting two randomly chosen vertices,v1andv2. The new configuration of the affected segments is represented by a dashed line.
B. Reptation move. The angles θ1–θ5are modified so that the two randomly chosen sections of the chain bounded by [v1−3,v1] and [v2,v2+ 4] can be exchanged. Again the alteration is represented by dashes.
Figure Locations...Two types of trial motions are used to select the new state from the current one, as shown in Figure 3....
...In the crankshaft move (Figure 3A) two vertices are selected at random, ...
...in which two disjoint subsections of the chain are exchanged as shown in Figure 3B....
...In Figure 3B, the 3-subchain bounded by [V1 −3, V1] is to be exchanged with the 4-subchain bounded by [V2, ...
Figure 4Reptation move violates detailed balance. In stateA, there is one possible choice of 4-segment,RSTUV, whose ends are separated by 3L. In this state there are (N−6) choices of 3-segment. Choosing segmentADand performing the reptation move produces stateB, in which there are four possible choices of 4-segment for exchange withAD; ifRSTUVis half a regular octagon, then,, and, so any of these could be chosen. Hence, in this state there are 4(N−6) ways to perform the reptation move, and.
Figure Locations...To see this, consider the two states shown in Figure 4, ...
...In state A of Figure 4 there is exactly one 4-chain whose gap is small enough to be spanned by a 3-chain....
Figure 5Schematic illustration of transcriptional twin-loop formation (adapted fromfigure 1in Reference (94)). (a) A transcription ensemble,R, tracks from left to right along a linear DNA template, both ends of which are anchored, torsionally constraining the domain. (b) IfRis rotationally hindered, for instance, owing to anchoring or viscous drag in the intracellular environment, transcription exerts a localized torque upon the template, represented by the vertical bar in the center of the figure. (c) Because the domain is topologically constrained, this torque simultaneously generates positive supercoils downstream and negative supercoils upstream from transcription.
Figure Locations...In this model, illustrated in Figure 5, rotation of RNA polymerase (RNAP) around the helical template during transcription is hindered, ...
Most Downloaded from this journalDeep Learning in Medical Image AnalysisDinggang Shen, Guorong Wu, Heung-Il SukVol. 19, 2017AbstractThis review covers computer-assisted analysis of images in the field of medical imaging. Recent advances in machine learning, especially with regard to deep learning, are helping to identify, classify, and quantify patterns in medical images. At the core ...
Read MoreFigure 1: Architectures of two feed-forward neural networks.
Figure 2: Three representative deep models with vectorized inputs for unsupervised feature learning. The red links, whether directed or undirected, denote the full connections of units in two consecut...
Figure 3: Three key mechanisms (i.e., local receptive field, weight sharing, and subsampling) in convolutional neural networks.
Figure 4: Construction of a deep encoder–decoder via a stacked auto-encoder and visualization of the learned feature representations. The blue circles represent high-level feature representations. The...
Figure 5: Similarity maps identifying the correspondence for the point indicated by the red cross in the template (a) with regard to the subject (b) by hand-designed features (d,e) and by stacked auto...
Figure 6: Typical registration results on 7.0-T magnetic resonance images of the brain by (c) Demons (87), (d) HAMMER (88), and (e) HAMMER combined with stacked auto-encoder (SAE)-learned feature repr...
Figure 7: Typical prostate segmentation results of two different patients produced by three different feature representations. Red contours indicate manual ground-truth segmentations, and yellow conto...
Figure 8: The architecture of the fully convolutional network used for tissue segmentation in Reference 48.
Figure 9: (a) Shared feature learning from patches of different modalities, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and positron emission tomography (PET), with a discriminative multimodal deep Boltz...
Figure 10: Functional networks learned from the first hidden layer of the deep auto-encoder from Reference 33. The functional networks in the left column correspond to (from top to bottom) the default...
The Effect of Nanoparticle Size, Shape, and Surface Chemistry on Biological SystemsAlexandre Albanese, Peter S. Tang, and Warren C.W. ChanVol. 14, 2012AbstractAn understanding of the interactions between nanoparticles and biological systems is of significant interest. Studies aimed at correlating the properties of nanomaterials such as size, shape, chemical functionality, surface charge, and composition with ...
Read MoreFigure 1: Overview of nano-bio interactions and their impact on the nanoengineering process. Typically, nanoparticles with a single or combination of known variable(s) (e.g., size, or size and surface...
Figure 2: Nanoparticle-cell interactions. (a) List of factors that can influence nanoparticle-cell interactions at the nano-bio interface. (b) Ligand-coated nanoparticles interacting with cells. The ...
Figure 3: Nanoparticles in tumor-specific delivery. Nanoparticles can be injected into a patient's blood and accumulate at the site of the tumor owing to enhanced permeation and retention. This prefer...
Figure 4: Evolution of nanoparticle design, highlighting the interplay between evolution of nanomaterial design and fundamental nano-bio studies. Abbreviations: Ab, antibody; EPR, enhanced permeation ...
Fluid Dynamics of Respiratory Infectious DiseasesLydia BourouibaVol. 23, 2021AbstractThe host-to-host transmission of respiratory infectious diseases is fundamentally enabled by the interaction of pathogens with a variety of fluids (gas or liquid) that shape pathogen encapsulation and emission, transport and persistence in the environment,...
Read MoreFigure 1: Core ideas about germ theory and transmission and their implications for epidemiology and public health, stemming from the legacy of Pasteur, Koch, Snow (not shown), Flügge, and Wells, estab...
Figure 2: The isolated respiratory drop emission paradigm, which remains the foundation of current infection control guidelines: the dichotomy between isolated small- and large-droplet respiratory emi...
Figure 3: (a) Paradigm shift from Wells's isolated droplet picture to that of the high-momentum turbulent (high-Re) multiphase exhalation cloud that carries droplets much further than if they were emi...
Figure 4: (a) Exhaled air with initial volume V0 and momentum I0 containing mucosalivary droplets of a given size distribution forms the multiphase cloud of initial density ρc(0) and initial buoyancy ...
Figure 5: Integrated PASS infection control management. (a) Masks reduce the forward momentum of the turbulent gas cloud and its droplet payload, though poor seals allow the gas cloud to follow the pa...
Figure 6: (a) Droplet size distributions from the literature (69–93) comparing respiratory emissions under a range of conditions; measured with different instrumentation and at different distances fro...
Figure 7: Compilation of results from the literature on quantification of droplet concentrations in a range of respiratory emissions from both infected and healthy subjects, showing a wide range of va...
Figure 8: (a) Sequence of emission of mucosalivary fluid (MS) from the respiratory tract (RT) during violent exhalations. The bulk of MS transforms into sheets that pierce with fluid retraction into l...
Neural Stimulation and Recording ElectrodesStuart F. CoganVol. 10, 2008AbstractElectrical stimulation of nerve tissue and recording of neural electrical activity are the basis of emerging prostheses and treatments for spinal cord injury, stroke, sensory deficits, and neurological disorders. An understanding of the electrochemical ...
Read MoreFigure 1: Typical charge-balanced, current waveforms used in neural stimulation. The parameters vary widely depending on the application and size of the electrode. Waveform parameters usually falling ...
Figure 2: Capacitive (TiN), three-dimensional faradaic (iridium oxide), and pseudocapacitive (Pt) charge-injection mechanisms.
Figure 3: Scanning electron micrograph of the porous surface of sputtered TiN that gives rise to a high ESA/GSA ratio.
Figure 4: Schematic view of a pore cross-section showing the pore resistance (R1‥R3) and double-layer capacitance (C1‥C3) elements that give rise to a delay-line and time-constant for accessing all th...
Figure 5: An AIROF microelectrode for intracortical stimulation and recording.
Figure 6: A CV of AIROF in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) at 50 mV s−1. The time integral of the negative current, shown by the blue region of the voltammogram, represents a CSCc of 23 mC cm−2.
Figure 7: Comparison of cyclic voltammograms of platinum, SIROF, and smooth TiN macroelectrodes (GSA = 1.4 cm2) in PBS at a sweep rate of 20 mV s−1. 1, 2 indicate Pt oxidation and reduction; 3, 4 indi...
Figure 8: A comparison of the difference in response of 50 mV s−1 and 50,000 mV s−1 CVs of an AIROF microelectrode implanted in cat cortex within one day following implantation and six weeks after imp...
Figure 9: Impedance of an AIROF microelectrode (GSA = 940 μm2) in three electrolytes of different ionic conductivities but fixed phosphate buffer concentration. The conductivities are determined by th...
Figure 10: Impedance of an AIROF microelectrode (same as Figure 9) in PBS and unbuffered saline of similar ionic conductivities. The low-frequency charge-transfer impedance increases with decreasing b...
Figure 11: Comparison of the impedance of a smooth and porous TiN film demonstrating the reduction in impedance realized with a highly porous electrode coatings.
Figure 12: Impedance of SIROF coatings on PtIr macroelectrodes as a function of thickness.
Figure 13: A voltage transient of an AIROF microelectrode in response to a biphasic, symmetric (ic = ia) current pulse.
Figure 14: Comparison of voltage transients of an AIROF microelectrode pulsed at 48 nC phase−1 at pulsewidths from 0.1–0.5 ms.
Figure 15: Comparison of the initial and final Va for an AIROF microelectrode showing the large Va at the end of the current pulse when the AIROF is reduced.
Figure 16: Charge-injection capacity as a function of electrode area. The importance of nonuniform current distributions and transport limitations in determining Qinj are reflected in the area depende...
Figure 17: Comparison of in vivo and in vitro voltage transients of an AIROF electrode pulsed in an inorganic model of interstitial fluid (model-ISF) and subretinally in rabbit.
Figure 18: Comparison of the CV response of an AIROF electrode in PBS, model-ISF, and subretinally in rabbit.
Figure 19: Comparison of the impedance magnitude of an AIROF electrode in model-ISF and subretinally in rabbit.
Glutaminolysis: A Hallmark of Cancer MetabolismLifeng Yang, Sriram Venneti, Deepak NagrathVol. 19, 2017AbstractGlutamine is the most abundant circulating amino acid in blood and muscle and is critical for many fundamental cell functions in cancer cells, including synthesis of metabolites that maintain mitochondrial metabolism; generation of antioxidants to remove ...
Read MoreFigure 1: Amino acid metabolic pathways in cancer cells. This detailed schematic depicts the involvement of essential amino acids and nonessential amino acids in protein synthesis, central carbon meta...
Figure 2: Glutamine anaplerosis into the TCA cycle. Glutamine is taken up via ASCT2 (SLC1A5) and is converted into glutamate. Glutamate is metabolized to α-KG through the action of either GLUD or tran...
Figure 3: Oncogenic signaling, tumor suppressor, and tumor microenvironment effects on glutamine metabolism. Expression levels of enzymes involved in the glutaminolysis pathway are regulated by intrin...
Figure 4: Glutamine provides carbon and nitrogen sources for cells. (a) Glutamine donates amide and amino nitrogens for purine, nonessential amino acid, and glucosamine synthesis. The green rectangles...
Figure 5: Metabolic pathways control NADPH and ROS balance. Glucose enters the pentose phosphate pathway to generate two NADPH molecules via G6PD and 6PGDH. Serine derived from 3-phosphate glycerate o...
Figure 6: Roles of glutamine in tumor proliferation. Glutamine is taken up by cells via ASCT2 (SLC1A5) and is exported out of the cytoplasm by SLC7A5 to enable uptake of leucine. Leucine binds to Sest...
Figure 7: Roles of glutamine in the regulation of tumor metastasis, apoptosis, and epigenetics. (a) ROS activate cytochrome c release from mitochondria, which in turn trigger the caspase apoptotic pat...
Figure 8: Multiple sources maintain intracellular glutamine levels in cancer cells. (a) Cancer cells can generate glutamine through glutamine anabolism. De novo glutamine synthesis is mediated by the ...
Figure 9: 18F-glutamine uptake, positron emission tomography (PET) imaging, and SLC1A5 expression in several cancer. (a) 18F-glutamine uptake is mediated mainly by the glutamine transporter SCL1A5 in ...
