old id = 1613
Palmitoylation of Intracellular Signaling Proteins: Regulation and Function | Annual Review of Biochemistry
2004
https://doi.org/10.1146%2Fannurev.biochem.73.011303.073954

Palmitoylation of Intracellular Signaling Proteins: Regulation and FunctionPalmitoylation of Intracellular Signaling Proteins: Regulation and FunctionAnnual Review of BiochemistryVol. 73:559-587 (Volume publication date July 2004)First posted online on March 9, 2004https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.biochem.73.011303.073954Jessica E. Smotrys and Maurine E. LinderDepartment of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110; email:[email protected],[email protected]Abstract▪AbstractProtein S-palmitoylation is the thioester linkage of long-chain fatty acids to cysteine residues in proteins. Addition of palmitate to proteins facilitates their membrane interactions and trafficking, and it modulates protein-protein interactions and enzyme activity. The reversibility of palmitoylation makes it an attractive mechanism for regulating protein activity, and this feature has generated intensive investigation of this modification. The regulation of palmitoylation occurs through the actions of protein acyltransferases and protein acylthioesterases. Identification of the protein acyltransferases Erf2/Erf4 and Akr1 in yeast has provided new insight into the palmitoylation reaction. These molecules work in concert with thioesterases, such as acyl-protein thioesterase 1, to regulate the palmitoylation status of numerous signaling molecules, ultimately influencing their function. This review discusses the function and regulation of protein palmitoylation, focusing on intracellular proteins that participate in cell signaling or protein trafficking.
Key Wordsthioacylation;protein acyltransferase;lipid raft;lipid modification;acyl-protein thioesterase.
BACKGROUND AND SCOPEProtein modification with fatty acids is a universal feature of eukaryotic cells. Historically, fatty acylation of eukaryotic proteins was divided into two classes: cotranslational addition of myristate to N-terminal glycine through amide linkage (myristoylation) and posttranslational addition of palmitate through thioester linkage to cysteine (palmitoylation) (1). However, fatty acylation of eukaryotic proteins is more diverse, and this categorization has been expanded to include modification of other amino acid residues with amide- and ester-linked fatty acids.
Protein N-myristoylation is the covalent attachment of myristate, a 14-carbon saturated fatty acid, to N-terminal glycine residues. The reaction is catalyzed by N-myristoyltransferase. Typically this occurs cotranslationally after the initiating methionine is cleaved by an aminopeptidase, but it can occur posttranslationally when an internal glycine residue is exposed by proteolytic cleavage (2). The enzymology and function of N-myristoylation have been well characterized, and a number of reviews are available (3,4,5).
S-palmitoylation refers to the addition of palmitate (C16:0) to cysteine residues through thioester linkage (6). Fatty acids thioesterified to proteins include fatty acids other than palmitate. These can be saturated, monounsaturated, and polyunsaturated species of varying chain lengths (C14 or longer). Thus, S-acylation and thioacylation are more general terms used to describe this process. In this review, the traditional term palmitoylation will be used for S-acylation. The enzymology of protein S-acylation is an emerging field and is covered in this review.
N-palmitoylation was first described for Sonic hedgehog, a secreted signaling protein (7). Palmitate modifies Hedgehog at the N-terminal cysteine residue through an amide linkage. An acyltransferase that palmitoylates Hedgehog has recently been identified inDrosophila(8,9,10). Lipid modifications of Hedgehog and other secreted signaling proteins are reviewed elsewhere in this volume (11).
Fatty acylation also occurs through oxyester attachment of palmitate or other fatty acids to serine or threonine. Oxyester-linked octanoate (C8:0) is found attached to serine in ghrelin, a growth-hormone-releasing peptide from stomach (12). O-palmitoyl threonine is found at the carboxyl terminus of an insect toxin derived from the spiderPlectreurys tristes(13).
Finally, several secreted proteins are modified at the ϵ-amino group of lysine with myristate or palmitate through an amide linkage. Fatty acylation at lysine occurs both in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. Lysine palmitoylation is found in bacterial toxins (14), whereas lysine myristoylation has been reported for two cytokine precursor proteins, tumor necrosis factor (15) and interleukin 1α (16). Although a bacterial acyltransferase for lysine palmitoylation has been identified (14), there is little information about the enzymes that acylate serine, threonine, and lysine residues in eukaryotic cells.
Palmitoylation is a widespread modification found almost exclusively on membrane proteins. The family of proteins modified with thioester-linked palmitate is large and diverse. It includes transmembrane-spanning proteins and proteins that are synthesized on soluble ribosomes. The focus of this review is on the latter with the role of palmitoylation in the function and regulation of intracellular signaling molecules emphasized. The diverse contexts and functions of palmitoylation demonstrate the versatility of this modification. In general, palmitoylation increases affinity of proteins for membranes and thereby affects protein localization and function. Several surprising functions that go beyond membrane affinity have also been described. Selected examples will be explored in detail to illustrate both common and unique roles of palmitoylation. Several other recent reviews on protein palmitoylation are available (617,18,19).
STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PROTEIN PALMITOYLATIONAn examination of the palmitoylated sequence motifs inTable 1reveals that there is no well-defined consensus sequence for this modification other than a requirement for cysteine. Very few S-palmitoylation sites in proteins have been mapped using mass spectroscopy or other physical techniques. In most cases, palmitoylation sites are deduced by mutagenesis of candidate cysteine residues. As palmitoylated proteins have been characterized over the years, several sequence contexts have emerged; representative proteins harboring these motifs are shown inTable 1. The list is by no means exhaustive. Palmitoylated proteins that are synthesized on soluble ribosomes either undergo sequential modification with different lipids or are exclusively S-palmitoylated.
Palmitoylation motifsSequential lipid modification is a property of several families of signaling proteins (5,20). A number of members of the Ras superfamily are prenylated and palmitoylated (21). The substrate recognition motif for a major class of prenylated proteins is a C-terminal –CaaXsequence in whichCrepresents cysteine,arepresents an aliphatic amino acid, andXrepresents the amino acid specifying farnesylation or geranylgeranylation (22). Prenylation at the cysteine residue is followed by proteolytic cleavage of the C-terminal three amino acids and by carboxyl-methylation of the prenylated cysteine. Cysteine residues immediately upstream of a prenylated cysteine are likely to be modified with palmitate. This modification has been well documented for H- and N-Ras proteins, which are farnesylated and palmitoylated (Table 1). There is evidence to suggest that palmitoylation is also found near geranylgeranylated cysteines. On the basis of sequence, R-Ras, RhoB, TC21, TCL, and Rap2b are predicted to be palmitoylated and geranylgeranylated. Radiolabeled palmitate incorporation into R-Ras and RhoB has been documented (23,24). The prenyl modification on RhoB has been characterized and is unexpectedly heterogeneous with both farnesylated and geranylgeranylated forms (25). It seems likely that palmitoylation is found in the context of geranylgeranyl groups, but this remains to be demonstrated directly.
N-myristoylated proteins that are palmitoylated have one or more cysteine residues adjacent to or nearby the N-myristoylated glycine (5,20). All members of the Src family of protein tyrosine kinases and the Giαsubfamily are N-myristoylated, and the majority of these proteins are also palmitoylated (seeTable 1for selected examples). A palmitoylated cysteine residue is often adjacent to the N-myristoylated glycine, but palmitoylation occurs at cysteine residues up to 20 amino acids distant from the N terminus (26). Endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS), which is N-myristoylated and palmitoylated at Cys15 and 26, has an unusual sequence requirement for palmitoylation (27). There are five GL repeats between the two palmitoylated cysteine residues that are required for palmitoylation (28). In most cases, however, the sequence context surrounding the palmitoylated cysteines has not been shown to be important for palmitoylation in a N-myristoylated protein (26,29).
Gsαis an unusual dually lipidated protein in that it is N-palmitoylated at the amino-terminal glycine (30) and S-palmitoylated at the adjacent cysteine (31) (Table 1). Although Gsαhas a glycine at position 2, similar to Giαproteins, it is not a substrate for N-myristoylation (32). S-palmitoylation at Cys3 is conserved in Gsαand may contribute to modification at Gly2. This hypothesis is suggested by studies of the N-palmitoylated Hedgehog protein (7). In Hedgehog, N- palmitoylation requires a cysteine side chain; a serine substitution blocks modification (7). This observation suggests a mechanism by which palmitate is first added to the free thiol on the cysteine side chain; then it is transferred to the α-amino group of the same residue (8). A similar mechanism may operate in Gsα, with palmitate transfer from the cysteine side chain to the free amino group on the glycine residue. Giαproteins would be resistant to this mechanism because the α-amino group of the glycine is occupied with myristate.
Proteins that are exclusively palmitoylated include a group that is modified at cysteine residue(s) within the N-terminal 25 amino acids of the protein. A number of examples are listed inTable 1. Inspection of the sequences does not reveal any obvious motif that will direct palmitoylation other than the presence of the cysteines. Of these proteins, the sequence requirements for palmitoylation of PSD-95 have been studied most extensively using site-directed mutagenesis and deletion mapping (33). PSD-95 (postsynaptic density protein of 95 kDa) is a PDZ-containing protein that clusters proteins into complexes at the postsynaptic density. The first 13 amino acids of PSD-95 are sufficient for palmitoylation with modification occurring at Cys3 and Cys5. Palmitoylation depends on five consecutive hydrophobic amino acids (3CLCIV7) that reside near the N terminus of the protein.
Palmitoylation of cysteine string motif proteins has been documented, but the requirements for palmitoylation have been studied only for SNAP-25. SNAP-25 is a neuronal SNARE protein found at the plasma membrane that mediates synaptic vesicle exocytosis. The cluster of four palmitoylated cysteines is found in the interhelical domain that connects the two SNARE complex-forming domains (34) (Table 1). Residues 85–120 of the interhelical domain are sufficient for palmitoylation and plasma membrane targeting of a heterologous soluble protein (35). A five amino acid motif (QPARV) that is 25 amino acids downstream of the cysteine motif is required for efficient palmitoylation and plasma membrane targeting (35). This sequence may mediate a protein interaction that is a prerequisite for palmitoylation. Palmitoylation of SNAP-25 requires at least three cysteine residues; mutation of two of the four cysteines results in a complete loss of radiolabeling (36). The requirement for three cysteine residues is interesting and may suggest a distinct mechanism (or protein acyltransferase) for proteins with cysteine clusters versus proteins that are modified at single or double sites.
The C-terminal palmitoylation motif of Yck2 (yeast casein kinase 2) ends with a cysteine doublet (Table 1). This motif is typically recognized by geranylgeranyltransferase type II with both cysteines modified by a geranylgeranyl isoprenoid (22). However, Yck2 is modified with palmitate at these cysteine residues (37). Other canonical prenylation sites may be modified with palmitate instead of prenyl groups (38). A Rho GTPase in plants (AtRac8) has a –CaaXmotif but does not appear to be prenylated. Instead, AtRac8 is palmitoylated near the C terminus, and its plasma membrane localization is dependent upon this modification (38). These studies underscore the limitations of sequence motifs as predictors of the lipidation state of a protein.
The diversity of palmitoylation motifs is evident from the discovery of sites within a well-characterized protein domain. Phospholipases D1 and D2 (PLD) are palmitoylated at cysteine residues within a pleckstrin homology (PH) domain (39,40) (Table 1). Modeling of the PLD1 PH domain places the palmitoylated cysteines in the loop connecting the first two beta strands of the domain (39). There is a complex interplay between palmitoylation and the phosphoinositide binding PH and PX domains in PLD that regulates its dynamic localization in the plasma membrane and Golgi (41,42).
MECHANISMS OF PROTEIN PALMITOYLATIONSince the discovery of S-palmitoylation, much effort has gone into understanding how palmitate is transferred onto proteins. Two mechanisms have been proposed. The first is through the action of an enzyme generically referred to as protein acyltransferase (PAT). The second mechanism is nonenyzmatic: spontaneous autoacylation of a protein in the presence of long-chain acyl-coenzyme As (CoAs). Genetic strategies in yeast have recently yielded the identity of two PATs (37,43). Thus it is clear that some palmitoylation reactions are mediated by enzymes. Autoacylation of two mitochondrial enzymes is important for their regulation (44,45), suggesting that both mechanisms are operational in cells.
AutoacylationAcylation of peptides and proteins can occur in vitro in the absence of an enzyme. Quesnel & Silvius (46) utilized short lipid-modified peptides mimicking a myristoylated GαN terminus or the prenylated and carboxymethylated C terminus of H-Ras. The cysteine residues in these peptides are acylated in the presence of lipid vesicles and acyl-CoAs (46). The presence of a membrane surface and affinity for that surface (as provided by prior lipid modification) were both found to be important for this reaction (46).
The amino acid context of cysteine residues is important for the rate of autoacylation in vitro. Surrounding amino acids influence the proximity and orientation of the cysteine to a membrane as well as the ability of that cysteine's thiol group to ionize. Using a peptide derived from the β2-adrenergic receptor (β2AR), Belanger et al. (47) demonstrated that basic and hydrophobic residues promote autoacylation, whereas acidic residues are inhibitory. In a separate study, basic and aromatic residues were found to decrease the pKaof peptide cysteine residues, which correlated with increased autoacylation (48). The pH affects the rate of palmitoylation of a myristoylated peptide in vitro (46), again indicating that autoacylation is more efficient under conditions that favor formation of thiolate ion in the cysteine residue. The requirement for specific sequences to yield palmitoylation of a protein in cells is often used as an argument against autoacylation as a physiological mechanism. However, these studies demonstrate that sequence context influences autoacylation.
Proteins as well as peptides undergo autoacylation. For example, myristoylated Giαreacts with palmitoyl CoA (palm-CoA) in vitro, resulting in nearly stoichiometric palmitoylation (49). Autoacylation of free Giαrequires myristoylation, and the rate of palmitoylation is accelerated by Gβγbinding (49). Both of these properties parallel what is observed in vivo. Not all palmitoylated proteins examined were found to autoacylate: Under the same conditions that Giαand Goαsubunits autoacylate, Gsα, Gqα, GAP43, p59fyn, and SNAP-25 (but see50) do not (49).
Palmitoylation of peptides and proteins clearly can occur in the absence of enzyme in vitro, but is autoacylation likely to be relevant in vivo? An important consideration is the available concentration of acyl-CoAs. In cells, acyl-CoAs are bound to acyl-CoA binding protein (ACBP), effectively reducing their concentration at the membrane surface. Inclusion of ACBP in peptide or protein palmitoylation reactions decreases autoacylation in a concentration-dependent manner (51,52). At physiological concentrations of lipids, acyl-CoA, and ACBP, Leventis et al. (51) calculated that autoacylation in cells would occur with halftimes on the order of days. This is in sharp contrast to the short palmitoylation halftimes observed in vivo for some proteins (< 1 h for Gsα) (53) and suggests that autoacylation is not likely to be responsible for palmitoylation of proteins where palmitate is rapidly cycling (51). It should be noted that estimates of the concentration of acyl-CoAs in cells vary widely (54). Better information about the concentration and spatial distribution of acyl-CoAs in cells would facilitate our understanding of enzymatic and nonenzymatic mechanisms of fatty acylation in vivo.
One area where autoacylation is likely to play an important physiological role is in the regulation of mitochondrial enzymes. Methylmalonate semialdehyde dehydrogenase is a mitochondrial enzyme that is acylated on its active site cysteine, presumably preventing this residue from interacting with substrate (44). Another mitochondrial enzyme, carbamoyl-phosphate synthetase 1 (CPS 1), is also palmitoylated within its active site, resulting in inhibition of enzymatic activity (45). Palmitoylation of purified CPS 1 occurs at palm-CoA concentrations within the physiological range found in mitochondria, indicating that autoacylation may also occur in vivo (45). This phenomenon may be a general mechanism for regulation of mitochondrial metabolic enzymes by fatty acids.
DHHC Cysteine-Rich Domain Proteins Are Protein AcyltransferasesPAT activities have been characterized in tissues and cell lines, but purification of the activities has not been sufficient to unveil their molecular identity (6). To date, two PATs for intracellular proteins have been identified, both in yeast: Erf2/Erf4 and Akr1. Erf2/Erf4 complex stimulates palmitoylation of Ras2 substrates, whereas Akr1 palmitoylates Yck2 (37,43). Erf2 and Akr1 each have a DHHC-CRD (Asp-His-His-Cys-cysteine-rich domain), a protein module that is a distinct variation of cysteine-rich zinc-finger domains (55,56). The DHHC-CRD is hypothesized to be a palmitoyltransferase domain (37,43).
Genetics in yeast led to both PAT discoveries. Yeast Ras2, similar to mammalian H-Ras and N-Ras, is palmitoylated on a cysteine adjacent to a-CaaXmotif in which the cysteine is prenylated and carboxymethylated (Table 1). Erf2 (effect on ras function) was identified, along with its binding partner Erf4, in a genetic screen for mutations that were synthetically lethal with a palmitoylation-dependent mutant allele of Ras2 (57). Erf4 had previously been identified in a screen for genes affecting Ras function and named Shr5 (suppressor of hyperactive ras) (58). In cells lacking Erf2 or Erf4, palmitate labeling of Ras2 is reduced, and Ras2 is partially mislocalized from the plasma membrane (57,58). When the Erf2/Erf4 complex is partially purified and incubated with Ras2 and palm-CoA, palmitoylation of Ras2 is stimulated 160-fold over the spontaneous rate, indicating that the complex is a PAT for Ras2 (43).
The other PAT enzyme-substrate pair that has been identified is Akr1 and Yck2. Akr1 is an ankyrin-repeat-containing protein with a DHHC-CRD that is involved in mating, cell morphology, and regulation of G-protein-coupled-receptor (GPCR) trafficking (59). The connection between Akr1 and its substrate Yck2 was identified by phenotypic analysis. Loss of either Akr1 or Yck2 function results in defective ligand-mediated endocytosis of the GPCR Ste2. Further study revealed that Akr1 is required for localization of Yck2 to the plasma membrane: In the absence of Akr1, Yck2 is mislocalized to the cytosol (60). Yck2 terminates with a dicysteine motif that is palmitoylated, and loss of Akr1 in cells abolishes in vivo palmitate labeling of Yck2 (37). Roth et al. (37) purified Akr1 to apparent homogeneity and demonstrated that Akr1 palmitoylates Yck2 in vitro.
Erf2 and Akr1 both have several predicted transmembrane (TM) domains and behave as integral membrane proteins (37,57). In contrast to Erf2 and Akr1, Erf4 does not contain any recognizable domains. Erf4 is tightly membrane associated, but the mode of association is not readily apparent because it is not predicted to contain TM domains or lipid modifications. A weak hydrophobic cluster present in the C-terminal half of the protein is essential for Erf4 interaction with Erf2 (61). However, Erf4, which lacks the hydrophobic cluster, is still tightly membrane associated, indicating that Erf2 is not mediating Erf4 membrane association (61).
The PAT activity generated by the Erf2/Erf4 complex has specificity toward Ras2 substrates (43). Erf2/Erf4 palmitoylated yeast Ras2 much better than mammalian H-Ras or myristoylated Giα. Within the Ras2 protein, the hypervariable domain is important for recognition by Erf2/Erf4. GST fused to a sequence, which consists of just the palmitoylated cysteine and the-CaaXmotif, is weakly palmitoylated by Erf2/Erf4. Addition of 28 residues of the hypervariable domain upstream of the-CaaXmotif results in a 10-fold increase in palmitoylation (43). Further analysis revealed that basic residues within the hypervariable domain, especially Arg297, are important for palmitoylation of Ras2 by Erf2/Erf4, but the role of these residues is unknown (62). The specific sequence requirements for substrate recognition displayed by Erf2/Erf4 is consistent with the existence of a large family of PATs, each with a unique set of substrates.
The diversity of fatty acids found on palmitoylated proteins in vivo suggests that a PAT should not be highly selective for acyl-CoAs. This specificity appears to be true for Erf2/Erf4. Long-chain acyl-CoAs (C16, C16:1, C18, and C18:1) are effective competitors for palm-CoA, whereas shorter acyl-CoAs are less so (C<14) (43). One activator of DHHC-CRD PAT activity has been reported: Addition of ATP to Akr1 PAT assays has a stimulatory effect on both Akr1 autoacylation and Yck2 palmitoylation (37). The mechanism of this stimulation is unknown.
The common element shared by Akr1 and Erf2 is the DHHC-CRD. The critical role of this domain in PAT activity has been documented both genetically and biochemically. In the synthetic lethal screen in whichERF2mutations were isolated, several point mutations within the DHHC-CRD were found (57). Directed mutagenesis demonstrated that two residues of the DHHC motif are essential (His201 and Cys203) for PAT activity of the purified Erf2/Erf4 complex (43). Similar mutations in Akr1 also abolish transferase activity (37).
Further insight into the importance of this domain is provided by the observation that both Erf2 and Akr1 are themselves palmitoylated during in vitro reactions (37,43), and Akr1 is palmitoylated in vivo (37). Palmitoylation may occur on the cysteine residue within the DHHC motif because mutation of that residue blocks autoacylation of either protein (37,43). However, this cysteine residue could be required for palmitoylation at another site. There are at least two possible roles for DHHC-CRD palmitoylation. First, DHHC-CRD palmitoylation may represent an acyl intermediate in the reaction with subsequent transfer of the fatty acid to the substrate (37,43). Peptide studies reveal that acylated peptides can efficiently donate their acyl group to an acceptor cysteine (46). The histidine in the DHHC motif is also required for PAT activity in vitro, suggesting a possible role for this residue in the transfer of palmitate from the DHHC-CRD to the substrate (37,43). An alternative possibility is that DHHC-CRD palmitoylation is required for the protein to adopt a conformation that permits palmitate transfer through another mechanism. These possibilities have yet to be explored.
DHHC-CRDs are found throughout the eukaryotic kingdom. There are seven DHHC-CRD-containing proteins inSaccharomyces cerevisiae. Of these, five are similar in overall organization to Erf2: They are approximately the same size (39–44 kDa), and contain four predicted TM domains. The DHHC-CRD is between the second and third TM domains extending into the third predicted TM. This group includes Erf2, Swf1 (spore wall formation), Yol003c, Ydr459c, and Ynl326c. The sequence similarity is generally restricted to within the DHHC-CRD. Other than Erf2, very little is known about these proteins. None of the DHHC-CRD genes is essential (63). Diploid cells lacking Swf1 sporulate very inefficiently due to a defect in formation of the spore wall (64) and have a strong vacuolar protein-sorting defect (65). The role of Swf1 in either of these processes is unknown.
Akr1 and Akr2 make up the remainder of the family in yeast. These proteins contain six predicted TMs and several N-terminal ankyrin repeats in addition to the DHHC-CRD. Ankyrin repeats are 33 amino acid conserved domains found in numerous proteins. Ankyrin repeats are often involved in protein-protein interactions, but how or if the ankyrin repeats have a role in palmitoylation of Yck2 by Akr1 is unknown. One possibility is that the ankyrin repeats bind Yck2 to bring it into proximity to the DHHC-CRD for palmitoylation. Whereas Akr1 is involved in mating, cell morphology, and endocytosis (59), no phenotypes have been described for cells lacking Akr2. Neither gene is essential (63).
In three of the DHHC-CRD proteins (Ydr459c, Akr1, and Akr2) the second histidine of the DHHC motif is replaced with tyrosine (DHYC). The CRDs present in these proteins are also more distantly related to the rest of the family in terms of cysteine conservation. The canonical domain contains seven cysteines with conserved spacing. Ydr459c has four of these cysteines, whereas Akr1 and Akr2 contain only two. Despite the divergence in the DHHC-CRD domains, Akr1 and Erf2 both harbor PAT activity and share essential features of the domain required for palmitate transfer.
Genomic databases indicate that human and mouse genomes each contain over 20 DHHC-CRD proteins (6). In contrast, Erf4 homologs are not readily identifiable in organisms other than fungi. To date, a few mammalian DHHC-CRDs have been cloned and initially characterized. A human DHHC-CRD-containing protein, huntingtin interacting protein 14 (HIP14), interacts with huntingtin (htt), the protein in which polyglutamine expansion leads to Huntington's disease (66). Some characteristics of HIP14 indicate that it may be involved in the pathogenesis of Huntington's disease: HIP14 interaction with htt is decreased by polyglutamine expansion in htt, and HIP14 expression is limited to the neural cells affected in Huntington's disease (66). Similar to Akr1, HIP14 contains ankyrin repeats. The human HIP14 cDNA complements the temperature-sensitive growth and endocytic defects ofakr1null yeast cells (66). Autoacylation or PAT activity of HIP14 remains to be explored. However, the ability of HIP14 to rescue the endocytic defect ofakr1null cells suggests that it may be able to palmitoylate Yck2 in yeast. Other cloned mammalian proteins that contain a DHHC-CRD include Golgi-specific DHHC zinc-finger protein (67), a proapoptotic c-Abl-interacting protein named Aph2 (68), and Sertoli cell gene with a zinc-finger domain (69). Experiments to determine if these proteins are involved in protein palmitoylation are eagerly awaited.
FUNCTIONS OF PALMITOYLATIONSimilar to other lipid modifications, palmitoylation promotes membrane association of otherwise soluble proteins. The function of palmitoylation, however, ranges beyond that of a simple membrane anchor. Trafficking of lipidated proteins from the early secretory pathway to the plasma membrane is dependent upon palmitoylation in many cases. In addition, modification with fatty acids impacts the lateral distribution of proteins on the plasma membrane by targeting them to lipid rafts. Palmitoylation works in concert with other lipid modifications and protein motifs to facilitate targeting to the appropriate cellular destination through mechanisms that are just beginning to be defined.
Membrane AssociationPalmitoylation occurs at membranes. Thus, soluble proteins must interact with membranes at least transiently to be palmitoylated. Once added, palmitate promotes stable membrane association. The two-signal hypothesis was developed for mammalian Ras proteins when it was discovered that plasma membrane targeting required a component in addition to farnesylation (70). This second signal could either be another lipid modification (palmitate) or an electrostatic interaction (basic amino acids that interact with the negatively charged phospholipid head groups at the plasma membrane). The model has been extended to other proteins and is supported by biophysical studies described below. For many proteins, however, the mechanisms that underlie initial membrane targeting to permit palmitoylation remain elusive.
S-palmitoylation of dually modified proteins is dependent upon prior modification with either the prenyl or N-myristoyl group (5,20). Current evidence favors a model in which the requirement for the first lipid modification is membrane targeting rather than providing a specific recognition determinant for a PAT (71). The model emerged from measurements of the relative affinities of lipidated peptides for model membranes. These studies demonstrated that a myristate or farnesyl group provides only a weak affinity for membranes, whereas tandem lipid modifications are sufficient for high-affinity interactions (71,72). The rates of interbilayer transfer of singly and dually lipid-modified peptides showed that dual lipid modifications resulted in essentially permanent association with the membrane (71). This led to the kinetic membrane trapping model, which states that proteins modified solely with myristate or farnesyl will cycle on and off membranes until they encounter a membrane with an appropriate membrane-targeting receptor. This interaction leads to the addition of the second lipid modification and results in essentially permanent membrane association. The protein interaction that permits palmitoylation need only be transient. Thus, a PAT is an excellent candidate for the membrane-targeting receptor. In the absence of the N-myristoylation or prenylation, other mechanisms that provide affinity for membranes can substitute for the addition of the first lipid.
G-protein α subunits of the Gqand G12families are modified only with thioester-linked palmitate (31,73). Their ability to be brought to a membrane compartment for palmitoylation involves interactions with Gβγsubunits (74). However, other mechanisms must exist because constitutively active forms of Gqαand G13αhave low affinity for Gβγ, but are palmitoylated when expressed at high levels in mammalian cells (75,76). Kosloff et al. (77) recently proposed on the basis of homology modeling that all G-protein α subunits have a positively charged structural motif near the N terminus that could facilitate membrane interactions and palmitoylation. The model may be applicable for other proteins, which include a subset of the regulators of G-protein signaling (RGS) proteins. RGS4, -5, and -16 have amphipathic α-helical domains near the palmitoylated residues in the N terminus (Table 1) that mediate membrane binding, in part through electrostatic interactions (78,79).
Palmitoylation and Lipid RaftsPalmitoylation targets proteins to lipid rafts, subdomains of the plasma membrane that are enriched in sphingolipids and cholesterol (80,81). This characteristic lipid composition confers resistance to detergent extractions and allows the isolation of rafts as low-buoyant-density membranes. Raft lipids are organized in the liquid-ordered (lo) phase in which the acyl chains of lipids are tightly packed, highly ordered, and extended (80,82). Proteins modified with saturated acyl chains are predicted to have high affinity for an ordered lipid environment (82). Indeed, the content of lipid rafts is rich in proteins modified with fatty acyl chains. These are proteins attached to the cell surface through glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchors (which contain predominately saturated fatty acids) and proteins anchored to the cytoplasmic inner leaflet through tandem myristoylation and palmitoylation or tandem palmitoylation.
Several lines of evidence support the importance of palmitoylation in targeting proteins to lipid rafts. Blocking palmitoylation through site-directed mutagenesis (83,84,85,86) or the use of the palmitoylation inhibitor 2-bromopalmitate (87) delocalizes proteins from rafts. Although palmitoylation increases affinity for rafts, not all palmitoylated proteins, e.g., many palmitoylated TM proteins, are residents of rafts (88). Targeting proteins to rafts via palmitoylation relies on the ability of the saturated fatty acid to fit well in an ordered lipid environment, and is not simply a function of hydrophobicity. Proteins modified with bulkier lipids like unsaturated fatty acids or prenyl groups are predicted to have low affinity for rafts (82). This has been demonstrated in model membranes (89,90) and in cells (91,92). Cholesterol is essential for organizing lipid rafts. Depletion of cell-surface cholesterol with β-methyl cyclodextran or other cholesterol-sequestering reagents disrupts lipid rafts and changes the lateral distribution of proteins within the plasma membrane (81,93,94).
The in vivo correlate of lipid rafts has been difficult to pin down, and estimates of the size and number of rafts in cells vary widely, depending upon the technique used (95). It is clear that proteins dynamically associate with lipid rafts. This is exemplified by GPI-anchored proteins, which are uniformly distributed on the cell surface until clustered with cross-linking antibodies (80,96). Reversible palmitoylation may represent a second mechanism for dynamic raft association, although to date this has not been demonstrated for a protein in response to a physiological signal.
Morphological studies support the organization of palmitoylated signaling proteins in membrane subdomains. Myristoylated, palmitoylated Giαsubunits have a punctate appearance in plasma membrane fragments when detected by immunofluorescence and have a clustered appearance when decorated with gold particles in electron micrographs of plasma membrane (97,98). Green fluorescent protein (GFP) tagged with raft targeting sequences (tandem myristoylation and palmitoylation or tandem palmitoylation) exhibits plasma membrane clustering in cells as assessed by fluorescence resonance energy transfer (92). Prior et al. (93) used statistical methods to analyze the distribution of H- and K-Ras proteins and derivatives thereof in electron micrographs of the plasma membrane. The study revealed the existence of multiple, nonoverlapping microdomains within the plasma membrane that would allow for a different spatial distribution of Ras isoforms. The distinctive lipid modifications of the Ras isoforms are an important (but not exclusive) determinant of targeting to these subdomains (21,99).
Localization of signaling proteins in rafts appears to be important for their function. This has been studied most extensively in immune cells (96,100). Palmitoylated proteins associated with early events in T-cell signaling include nonreceptor tyrosine kinases (NRTKs) and the TM protein LAT (linker for activation of T cells). Mutation of the palmitoylation sites in NRTKs (101) or LAT (102,103) results in attenuated T-cell responses, demonstrating the necessity for the palmitoylated cysteines in signaling. Treatment of T cells with polyunsaturated fatty acids or 2-bromopalmitate inhibits T-cell signaling and palmitoylation of LAT and NRTK, and it disrupts raft structure (87,91,104), strengthening the correlation between palmitoylation, raft targeting, and productive signaling. The precise role of lipid rafts in immune cell signaling is controversial (100). Nonetheless, the data strongly imply a role for palmitoylation in organizing protein interactions needed for signal propagation.
Most of the work on lipid rafts has focused on how they organize proteins on the plasma membrane. An open question is whether proteins are sorted into lipid rafts on intracellular membranes as a mechanism for transporting them to the cell surface. It has been proposed that cholesterol-sphingolipid rafts first assemble in the Golgi (80,81). Acquisition of detergent resistance for a newly synthesized GPI-anchored protein occurs in the medial Golgi, correlating with the presence of significant amounts of sphingolipid and cholesterol in the Golgi membranes. Sphingolipids and GPI-anchored proteins are components of the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane. Much less is understood about how lipid rafts are organized on the cytoplasmic leaflet of membranes and how or if the raft domains in both leaflets are coupled (81). This is an important question with respect to the trafficking of fatty acylated proteins that associate with the cytoplasmic leaflet. As described below, palmitoylation represents an important signal for transport to the plasma membrane and to specialized domains in neurons. Sorting of palmitoylated proteins into cholesterol-rich subdomains that form on intracellular membranes represents one model of how this could occur.
Trafficking of Lipid-Modified Signal TransducersOur understanding of the trafficking of lipidated proteins has been enhanced by information about the location of the modifying enzymes and improved visualization of proteins using GFP. Ras proteins are among the best studied (105,106). All Ras proteins are synthesized on soluble ribosomes and farnesylated in the cytoplasm by farnesyltransferase. The enzyme may transport Ras to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) where it encounters the next two processing enzymes, the-CaaXprotease Ras-converting enzyme 1 (107) and the isoprenylcysteine carboxyl methyltransferase (108). At this point, Ras isoforms diverge in their trafficking pathways. K-Ras4B, a nonpalmitoylated form of Ras, trafficks to the plasma membrane through a pathway that is independent of the classical secretory pathway. H- and N-Ras are further modified by palmitoylation in the early secretory pathway. The mammalian Ras PAT has not been identified, but theS. cerevisiaeRas PAT Erf2/Erf4 is localized in the ER (57,61). When palmitoylation of H- or N-Ras is blocked by mutation or treatment of cells with 2-bromopalmitate, Ras accumulates in the early secretory pathway. This suggests that palmitoylation is a signal for exit from the early secretory pathway. Trafficking of Ras through intracellular membranes is not simply a biosynthetic journey. Contrary to the long-standing dogma that Ras signals exclusively from the plasma membrane, recent studies demonstrate that Ras is also actively signaling on intracellular membranes (109). If as the data suggest, palmitoylation controls exit from the early secretory pathway, it could have an important regulatory role in controlling where Ras is available for signaling.
Newly synthesized heterotrimeric G proteins appear to use a pathway similar to that of palmitoylated Ras proteins to get to the plasma membrane (110,111). G proteins are functional heterodimers of the GTP-binding α subunit and a tightly associated βγ complex. G-protein α subunits are modified with amide-linked myristate, thioester-linked palmitate, or both. The γ subunit is modified by prenylation and carboxylmethylation at the C terminus. G-protein β and γ subunits assemble in the cytoplasm after synthesis (112). Following prenylation in the cytoplasm, the complex moves to the ER where subsequent C-terminal processing of the Gγprenylated cysteine occurs. The heterotrimer appears to assemble on Golgi membranes and then transit to the plasma membrane. The model is based on studies of exogenously expressed proteins in which Gβγsubunits accumulate in the ER and Golgi in the absence of Gαexpression (110,111). Engineering a palmitoylation site into Gγ(111) or coexpression of palmitoylated Gαsubunits (110) rescues plasma membrane localization of Gβγ. Both Gαand Gβγaccumulate on intracellular membranes when palmitoylation–defective Gαis expressed (110,111). Thus, palmitoylation again appears to be important for exit from the Golgi and transport to the plasma membrane.
The studies just described for H-Ras and G-protein heterotrimers are consistent with a model in which they move to the plasma membrane through the classical secretory pathway tethered to the cytosolic surface of transport vesicles. A close examination of this question was recently performed in yeast with respect to the trafficking of Ras2 (62). In yeast, the classical secretory pathway can be inactivated genetically with temperature-sensitive mutations inSECgenes or with the inhibitor Brefeldin A (BFA). Perturbation of the classical secretory pathway does not affect the ability of Ras2 to localize to the plasma membrane, indicating that the secretory pathway is not required for trafficking (62). With the exception of Erf2/Erf4, the components of the alternative trafficking pathway in yeast are a mystery (61,62). Interestingly, the alternative pathway does not appear to require vesicular transport because Ras2 can proceed to the plasma membrane even when Sec18, the yeast homolog of N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor (NSF), is inactivated (62).
Does an equivalent alternative trafficking pathway for palmitoylated proteins exist in mammalian cells? TC10 is a mammalian GTPase that is farnesylated and palmitoylated similar to H-Ras (Table 1). Disruption of the secretory pathway in adipocytes by BFA or by a temperature block does not affect plasma membrane localization of TC10 (or H-Ras); this is consistent with the existence of an alternative trafficking pathway (113). The results obtained with H-Ras in adipocytes (113) are inconsistent with those obtained in BHK cells (106), suggesting that the pathways taken by proteins may vary by cell type.
Targeting of Palmitoylated Proteins in NeuronsIn neurons, newly synthesized proteins in the cell body must be transported to their appropriate destination, sometimes at great distances. Proteins are sorted at the trans-Golgi network into vesicles for transport to the axon, dendrites, or growth cones. PSD-95, localized prominently in dendrites, requires palmitoylation to associate with perinuclear vesiculotubular structures that bud transport intermediates destined for postsynaptic sites (33). Similarly, SCG-10, a microtubule-destabilizing protein, requires palmitoylation for targeting to Golgi membranes for transport to neuronal growth cones (114,115). In other cases, proteins synthesized on soluble ribosomes use a hierarchy of signals to be transported to the appropriate location. One such example is the enzyme glutamic acid decarboxylase 65 kDa (GAD65) that synthesizes the neurotransmitter γ-aminobutyric acid. GAD65 is localized in synaptic vesicles at the nerve terminal and synaptic-like vesicles in pancreatic β cells (116). The N-terminal 72 amino acids of GAD65 are sufficient to target GFP to presynaptic clusters in nerve terminals and for its relative exclusion from dendrites (94). GAD65 is palmitoylated at residues 30 and 45 (117) (Table 1). The enzyme is synthesized as a soluble protein and associates with membranes through a palmitoylation-independent mechanism that requires residues 24–31 (118). Membrane targeting specifically to the Golgi requires residues 1–24, again in a palmitoylation-independent fashion (119). Palmitoylation is essential for post-Golgi trafficking to presynaptic clusters in a cholesterol-dependent manner (94). Thus, for GAD65, the primary function of palmitoylation is to facilitate sorting of GAD65 into cholesterol-rich membrane microdomains, rather than initial targeting of the protein to Golgi membranes.
Regulation of Protein ActivityThe requirement for protein palmitoylation in a signaling pathway or other cellular process is often associated with localization of the modified protein. However, palmitoylation also functions in the regulation of protein activity. Although the structural basis of this regulation is not well understood, in vitro assays are revealing the importance of palmitoylation in promoting or inhibiting protein interactions.
Palmitoylation regulates protein activity at multiple levels of G-protein-mediated signaling, starting with localization of heterotrimeric G proteins at the plasma membrane. Interfering with palmitoylation of Gαsubunits has variable consequences on signal transduction, depending upon the Gαin question. Palmitoylation-defective Gsand Gqpoorly transduce signals from receptor to effector in cell-based assays of second-messenger production (75). However, Giαfamily members that are N-myristoylated, but are not palmitoylated, retain some ability to signal (120,121). Effects on signaling can be correlated with mislocalization. However, the possibility that loss of palmitoylation also has an effect on receptor or effector interactions cannot be excluded. Furthermore, because many assays to assess the function of palmitoylation use replacement of cysteine residues, caution must be used when attributing the loss of function to a deficit in palmitoylation rather than a change in the amino acids. This possibility was elegantly demonstrated by Hepler et al. (122) who showed that depalmitoylated Gqαfunctioned normally in a purified reconstituted system of M1-muscarinic receptor Gqand phospholipase Cβ. A palmitoylation-defective mutant Gqα(C9S, C10S) was nonfunctional in the same assay, demonstrating the importance of the cysteine residues themselves, rather than the modification for receptor/effector coupling (122).
Palmitoylation also impacts the interactions of G-protein α subunits and RGS proteins. RGS proteins constitute a large family with a shared RGS domain that harbors GTPase activating protein (GAP) activity toward Gαsubunits (123). In vitro palmitoylated Giαproteins resist the GAP activity of RGS proteins (124). Palmitoylation of Gzα, a Giαfamily member, decreased the affinity of its cognate RGS protein RGSZ1 for the GTP-bound form of Gzαby at least 90% and decreased the maximum rate of GTP hydrolysis. Other Gα-RGS pairs exhibited similar regulation, suggesting that palmitoylation of Giαfamily members and perhaps other G proteins may be an important determinant in terminating signaling through GPCR-coupled pathways (124).
A number of RGS proteins are themselves substrates for palmitoylation (125). The functional consequences of RGS palmitoylation have been studied best for RGS4 and RGS16. These proteins share an N-terminal membrane interaction domain that includes palmitoylated cysteines at positions 2 and 12 (126,127) (Table 1). Modification of the N-terminal residues precedes palmitoylation at a cysteine residue buried in the RGS core domain (Cys98 in RGS16 and Cys95 in RGS4) (128,129). Palmitoylation of the N-terminal domain is not necessary for plasma membrane localization (126,127) but is important for localization in lipid rafts (129). In cells, raft localization appears to facilitate palmitoylation of RGS16 on the core domain cysteine, but it is not required for RGS16 activity in signaling (129).
In vitro multisite palmitoylation of RGS proteins has profound and complex effects on GAP activity (128). Palmitoylation of RGS4 at the N terminus potentiates GAP activity when assayed at a membrane surface but has no effect in solution-based turnover assays. Palmitoylation at the internal cysteine residue is inhibitory for GAP activity when assayed in solution and when reconstituted into lipid vesicles with receptor and G protein. These data suggest that palmitoylation of the core domain has a negative regulatory role in RGS GAP activity. The core domain cysteine is highly conserved among RGS proteins, and this may represent a common regulatory mechanism. However, in the same study, analysis of a second RGS protein yielded different results. RGS10 is palmitoylated at the internal cysteine in the core domain, but lacks the N-terminal cysteines found in RGS4 and RGS16 (Table 1). Palmitoylation of the RGS10 core domain is inhibitory in the solution-based assay, as was the case for RGS4, but stimulates GAP activity greater than 20-fold in receptor–G-protein proteoliposomes (128).
Studies of RGS16 and RGS10 core domain palmitoylation in cells lend support for a positive regulatory role for this modification (129,130,131). RGS10 and RGS16 inhibit signaling through Gq- and Gi-mediated pathways in cells. When the core domain cysteine is mutated, RGS10 and RGS16 are less effective regulators of the signaling pathway, suggesting that the cysteine residue plays a positive role in regulating RGS activity (130,131). Osterhout et al. (131) ruled out mislocalization of the RGS16 mutant as an explanation for the diminished activity of the core domain palmitoylation mutant in cells and demonstrated that GAP activity of RGS4 and RGS16 was increased when the core domain cysteine was palmitoylated. In their study, GAP activity was measured using mammalian cell membranes expressing a functional fusion of the 5-hydroxytryptamine-1A receptor with Goα1and stoichiometrically palmitoylated RGS4. These results are in opposition to what was measured for RGS4 in receptor–G-protein proteoliposomes (128). However, the discrepancy may be explained by the different lipid composition or additional protein factors that are present in cell membranes (131).
It is clear from these and other studies (132,133) that RGS protein activity is exquisitely sensitive to its membrane environment. Not unexpectedly, palmitoylation of RGS4 and RGS16 in the N-terminal domain contributes to interactions at membrane surfaces in vitro and lipid raft localization in vivo. In addition to membrane interactions, RGS palmitoylation might also exert effects through conformational changes. In RGS4, the core domain cysteine is found in the middle of helix 4 in the four-helix bundle that makes contact with Giα. The presence of palmitate at this site could shift the packing of the helices, thereby altering the domain that binds Gα-GTP and accordingly affects GAP activity (128).
Recent studies implicate protein palmitoylation as an essential step in the process of vacuolar membrane fusion (134,135). The yeast vacuole is equivalent to the mammalian lysosome and has been exploited as a model to understand organelle biogenesis and membrane trafficking (136). The discovery of a large number of genes and their role in vacuolar inheritance, homeostasis, and membrane trafficking has been complemented by biochemical reconstitution of a vacuolar function, homotypic vacuole fusion (137). Similar to fusion of Golgi transport vesicles (138,139), vacuolar fusion is strongly stimulated by palm-CoA (140). The effector of palm-CoA in these assays has not been identified but is presumed to be a protein. A candidate for the palm-CoA effector is the protein product ofVAC8, which was uncovered in a screen for genes involved in vacuolar inheritance (141).
Vac8 is an armadillo repeat protein with an N-terminal sequence that directs both N-myristoylation and palmitoylation (141). Both modifications are required for complete localization of Vac8 at the vacuolar membrane (141). By contrast to most proteins that are dually modified with myristate and palmitate, Nmyristoylation is dispensable for function (vacuolar inheritance), whereas Spalmitoylation is not. Thus, myristoylation and palmitoylation are uncoupled in Vac8, suggesting that palmitoylation of Vac8 might serve functions in addition to membrane binding. Vac8 is necessary for vacuolar fusion in vivo and in vitro. Notably, fusion reactions with vacuoles lacking Vac8 or harboring a palmitoylation-defective Vac8 are not stimulated by palm-CoA (134,135). Palmitoylation of Vac8 occurs early during the vacuolar fusion reaction with palm-CoA serving as the palmitate donor (135,142). Vac8 acts at a late step in the fusion reaction, following formation oftrans-SNARE pairs (134,135). Weisman and coworkers (134) proposed that Vac8p may bind the fusion machinery through its armadillo repeats and that palmitoylation brings this machinery to specialized lipid raft domains that facilitate bilayer mixing. The enrichment of Vac8 at sites of vacuole-vacuole contact in vivo is consistent with this model (143,144). Although the precise role of Vac8 palmitoylation remains to be elucidated, it is clear that it plays an essential role in the process of vacuole fusion. Mammalian homologues of Vac8 have not been identified, but the requirement for palm-CoA in mammalian Golgi transport assays suggests that the mechanisms discovered here might represent a more general role in membrane fusion (134).
PALMITATE TURNOVER AND ITS REGULATIONRemoval of palmitate from proteins occurs both constitutively and in response to signals. Depalmitoylation is carried out by thioesterases. Palmitoyl-protein thioesterase I (PPT1) and PPT2 are lysosomal hydrolases involved in the cleavage of acyl-cysteine linkages during the process of protein degradation (145,146). These enzymes have been recently reviewed elsewhere (6). Acyl-protein thioesterase 1 (APT1) is a cytosolic thioesterase that depalmitoylates several signaling molecules and may have a role in regulation of their activity. APT1 has a wide range of substrates in vitro, but the cellular roles of APT1 are just beginning to emerge.
Palmitate TurnoverPalmitate is a dynamic modification that is continually turning over on cellular proteins. An example of this phenomenon is the mannose-6-phosphate receptor. The t1/2of the receptor protein is 40 h, but the t1/2of the attached palmitate is only 2 h (147). This suggests that a single protein undergoes several cycles of palmitoylation and depalmitoylation during its lifetime.
The mannose-6-phosphate receptor undergoes constitutive palmitate turnover. Depalmitoylation can also be a regulated process within a cell. For example, in response to activation of β-ARs with the agonist isoproterenol, palmitate turnover on Gsαincreases, as revealed by increased palmitate incorporation (53,148,149). The increased turnover is due to an increase in the rate of depalmitoylation as revealed by pulse-chase analysis (53,149). Jones et al. (150) determined that ∼70% of endogenous Gsαis palmitoylated in COS or S49 lymphoma cells. Following isoproterenol treatment of these cells, the percentage of palmitoylated Gsαdoes not change significantly (150). This suggests that repalmitoylation occurs quickly because unpalmitoylated Gsαdoes not accumulate. Mutationally activated Gsαincorporates much less palmitate in cells than does wild-type Gsα, again linking activation to depalmitoylation (53). This may be a general Gαphenomenon, as palmitate turnover on Giαis also affected by activation of the 5-hydroxytryptamine-1A receptor (151).
In addition to Gαsubunits, β2AR and m2muscarinic acetylcholine receptors show enhanced palmitate turnover after stimulation with agonists (152,153). The enhancement of palmitate turnover on both Gsαand β2AR depends directly on their activation rather than on feedback from downstream components of the pathway. This was demonstrated utilizing a β2AR-Gsαfusion protein in which both receptor and Gsαare depalmitoylated in response to treatment with agonist (154). Treatment of cells with forskolin, which mimics downstream components of the pathway and bypasses the receptor and G protein, did not increase depalmitoylation of this fusion protein (154).
The cycle of palmitate turnover on a GPCR and heterotrimeric G protein in response to pathway activation is illustrated inFigure 1. In the basal state (A), both the GPCR and Gαare palmitoylated. Gαalso contains a stable lipid modification, either amide-linked palmitate (Gsα) (30) or myristate (Giα) (32), and Gβγis prenylated (20). In response to ligand (B), Gαexchanges GDP for GTP and dissociates from Gβγ. Free Gαis a substrate for the thioesterase APT1 (see below) and is depalmitoylated (155,156,157). The GPCR is also depalmitoylated, but the identity of the thioesterase is unknown. Following activation and depalmitoylation (C), Gαdistribution may be altered. One group reports that Gsαmoves into the cytoplasm following activation (158). However, Huang et al. (98) demonstrated that overexpressed Gsαand endogenous Giαremain membrane associated following in vitro depalmitoylation by APT1. Instead, depalmitoylation may result in movement of Gαinto a different membrane subdomain. Visualization of endogenous Giαrevealed a subtle redistribution within the membrane in the presence of activating GTPγS (98). In the depalmitoylated state, Gαis susceptible to the GAP activity of RGS proteins (124). RGS proteins promote GTP hydrolysis, and Gαreassociates with Gβγ. Once the heterotrimer is reformed (D), Gαis a substrate for an unidentified PAT in the plasma membrane (159). The GPCR is also repalmitoylated.
The palmitoylation status of other proteins has also been linked to their activation. Depalmitoylation of eNOS increases in response to treatment of cells with bradykinin (160). Receptor-mediated increases in turnover have not been reported for Ras proteins; however, the rate of palmitate turnover on H-Ras does correlate with its activation state. Activated H-Ras has faster palmitate turnover than nonactivated H-Ras in vivo, again because of an increased rate of depalmitoylation (161). Palmitate turnover has also been described for the postsynaptic density protein PSD-95. Glutamate receptor activity triggers depalmitoylation of PSD-95 in neurons (162). How glutamate receptor activity regulates palmitoylation of PSD-95 is unknown, but it depends on the influx of extracellular calcium (162).
As mentioned above, depalmitoylation has a subtle effect on membrane distribution of Giα(98). Because palmitoylation confers affinity for lipid rafts, depalmitoylation may also affect partitioning within these membrane subdomains. In the case of H-Ras, lateral movements within the membrane appear to coincide with activation: GTP-bound activated H-Ras is excluded from rafts, whereas GDP-bound inactive H-Ras partitions into rafts (99). Knowing that GTP-bound Ras has faster palmitate turnover, it seems possible that there is a connection between activation, depalmitoylation, and lateral movement within the membrane.
Palmitate cycling on PSD-95 may have a role in regulating synaptic strength. Blocking repalmitoylation by treatment of neurons with 2-bromopalmitate results in dispersal of PSD-95 from synaptic clusters (162). The effect of 2-bromopalmitate indicates that palmitate is turning over on PSD-95 and that repalmitoylation is necessary to keep it localized at the synapse. 2-Bromopalmitate also declusters receptors for α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionic acid (AMPA) and reduces the amplitude and frequency of AMPA-mediated miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents (162). The role of palmitate turnover becomes clear when examining the internalization of AMPA receptors following exposure to glutamate. Internalization was enhanced with overexpression of PSD-95 but abolished when cells expressed PSD-95 prenyl, which is membrane targeted but does not undergo lipid turnover (162). Thus, palmitate turnover on PSD-95 is critical for downregulation of AMPA receptors in response to glutamate, which in turn may regulate synaptic strength.
Acyl-Protein Thioesterase 1One enzyme has been identified that removes palmitate from proteins on the cytosolic surface of membranes. APT1 was purified from rat liver cytosol because of its ability to remove palmitate from Giα(156). APT1 is a 29 kDa protein that was previously characterized as having lysophospholipase activity toward palmitoylated glycerol-3-phosphocholine (163). Duncan & Gilman (156,157) demonstrated that palmitoylated proteins are in fact the preferred substrate of APT1 with both a lower Kmand higher catalytic efficiency toward protein substrates. APT1 is widely conserved from yeast to humans (156).
Several palmitoylated proteins are substrates in vitro for mammalian APT1 in addition to Giα(156). These are Gsα, RGS4, H-Ras, and eNOS (156,164). The catalytic efficiency of rat APT1 toward H-Ras is about one third of that observed for Giα(156). In contrast to the rat enzyme, Apt1 fromS. cerevisiaedoes not depalmitoylate RGS4 or H-Ras, but mammalian Giαis a substrate (157). There is also evidence indicating that Gαsubunits and eNOS are substrates for APT1 in cells. Heterologous expression of rat APT1 in mammalian cells leads to increased loss of palmitate from Gsα(156) and from eNOS (164). In yeast, deletion of theAPT1gene results in decreased turnover of palmitate on Gpa1 (Table 1), a heterotrimeric G-protein α subunit, in the unstimulated state (157).
As described in the previous section, activation of some signaling proteins correlates with increased palmitate turnover. The observation that APT1 prefers activated proteins as substrates for its depalmitoylating activity is consistent with those studies. Gαis a better substrate for APT1 in the absence of Gβγ(in the GDP- or GTP-bound state) or when activated with AlF4−to release Gβγfrom the heterotrimeric complex (156,157). Similarly, eNOS is a better substrate for APT1 in vitro in the presence of Ca2+-calmodulin, which converts eNOS into an active conformation (164). The same appears to hold true with Ras proteins. H-Ras proteins that are predominantly inactive show a slower palmitate turnover in vivo than do activated oncogenic forms (161). This finding again suggests that the activated protein is a better substrate for depalmitoylation, although APT1 has not been specifically implicated in the latter reaction.
The variety of activated substrates indicates that APT1 does not recognize a specific protein sequence determinant. A conformational change (or dissociation of a binding partner) in the vicinity of the palmitoyl group may make it more accessible for cleavage, regardless of protein sequence context. Another possibility concerns the proximity of APT1 to substrate. As mentioned, APT1 was purified from cytosol, but its substrates are membrane associated. It is unknown if APT1 is recruited to membranes following signal activation or if there is simply enough present near the membrane to accomplish depalmitoylation.
The effect of APT1 deficiency in mammalian cells has yet to be explored, but yeastapt1null cells have been generated. Deletion ofAPT1results in loss of thioesterase activity of yeast cell extracts toward lipid-modified mammalian Giαbut not H-Ras (157). If these results are confirmed with the yeast orthologs, Gpa1 and Ras2, then they suggest that another acyl-protein thioesterase activity may be present in yeast (157). Yeast cells lacking Apt1 are viable and do not have defects in growth rate or lipid metabolism (157). Despite the fact that Apt1 affects palmitate turnover on Gpa1, this does not translate into a gross signaling defect in the pheromone response pathway (157). Further studies will be necessary to uncover the signaling function of Apt1 in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVESIt is clear that protein palmitoylation plays important and diverse roles in eukaryotic cells. It is also evident that much remains to be understood about this lipid modification. Although palmitoylation contributes to initial membrane binding, it is probably more important for trafficking between membrane compartments or subdomains within the same membrane than serving as a stable membrane anchor. A key area for future investigation is how protein-bound palmitate cooperates with other protein determinants and membrane lipids to direct proteins to their appropriate membrane compartment.
The discovery of twoS. cerevisiaePATs will invigorate the study of protein palmitoylation. Both of these PATs, Erf2/Erf4 and Akr1, contain a DHHC-CRD that may function generally as a PAT domain. Identification of mammalian counterparts of these proteins is an important goal. Much remains to be learned about the mechanism of the PAT reaction itself, and this may lead to the development of specific inhibitors. The molecular identification of PAT activities provides the opportunity to manipulate protein expression using gene knockouts or mRNA knockdowns. Similar strategies can be applied to APT1. The field is now positioned to make significant advances in understanding the mechanism and function of protein palmitoylation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTSWork in the authors' laboratory is supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health and the American Cancer Society. M.E.L. is an Established Investigator of the American Heart Association. J.E.S. is a predoctoral fellow of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the beneficiary of an Olin Fellowship for Women. We thank Dr. Deborah Brown and members of our laboratory, Dr. John Swarthout, Vivek Mittal, and Andrew Grillo-Hill for comments on the manuscript.
1LITERATURE CITEDEmerging Roles of Posttranslational Modifications in Plant-Pathogenic Fungi and BacteriaMEMBRANE-ASSOCIATED GUANYLATE KINASES REGULATE ADHESION AND PLASTICITY AT CELL JUNCTIONSMembrane-Protein Interactions in Cell Signaling and Membrane TraffickingMEMBRANE DOMAINSDECODING Ca2+ SIGNALS THROUGH PLANT PROTEIN KINASESNovel Lipid Modifications of Secreted Protein SignalsYeast Vacuole Inheritance and DynamicsTetraspanin Proteins Mediate Cellular Penetration, Invasion, and Fusion Events and Define a Novel Type of Membrane MicrodomainNovel Lipid Modifications of Secreted Protein SignalsSpecialized Intercellular Communications via Cytonemes and NanotubesSending and Receiving Hedgehog SignalsNovel Lipid Modifications of Secreted Protein SignalsHedgehog Signaling and Human DiseaseSending and Receiving Hedgehog SignalsDrugging the Cancer Stem Cell Compartment: Lessons Learned from the Hedgehog and Wnt Signal Transduction PathwaysTHE WNT SIGNALING PATHWAY IN DEVELOPMENT AND DISEASENovel Lipid Modifications of Secreted Protein SignalsRegulatory Principles of Developmental SignalingSending and Receiving Hedgehog SignalsNovel Lipid Modifications of Secreted Protein SignalsRegulatory Principles of Developmental SignalingSending and Receiving Hedgehog SignalsNovel Lipid Modifications of Secreted Protein SignalsSending and Receiving Hedgehog SignalsNovel Lipid Modifications of Secreted Protein SignalsCellular, Molecular, and Physiological Adaptations of Hibernation: The Solution to Environmental ChallengesThe Central Nervous System Sites Mediating the Orexigenic Actions of GhrelinG Protein–Coupled Receptor DeorphanizationsFood Components with Anti-Obesity EffectNeurobiology of Feeding and Energy ExpenditurePharmacogenomic and Structural Analysis of Constitutive G Protein–Coupled Receptor ActivityResults of Bariatric SurgeryThe Identification of Ligands at Orphan G-Protein Coupled ReceptorsGenetics and Pathophysiology of Human ObesityGrowth Hormone Therapy in AdultsControl of Growth by the Somatropic Axis: Growth Hormone and the Insulin-Like Growth Factors Have Related and Independent RolesStructure and Function of MARTX Toxins and Other Large Repetitive RTX ProteinsBacterial Membrane Lipids: Where Do We Stand?Swinging Arms and Swinging Domains in Multifunctional Enzymes: Catalytic Machines for Multistep ReactionsUnderstanding the Function of Mammalian Sirtuins and Protein Lysine AcylationThe Substrate Specificity of SirtuinsUnderstanding the Function of Mammalian Sirtuins and Protein Lysine AcylationNovel Lipid Modifications of Secreted Protein SignalsMEMBRANE-ASSOCIATED GUANYLATE KINASES REGULATE ADHESION AND PLASTICITY AT CELL JUNCTIONSMEMBRANE-ASSOCIATED GUANYLATE KINASES REGULATE ADHESION AND PLASTICITY AT CELL JUNCTIONSTetraspanin Proteins Mediate Cellular Penetration, Invasion, and Fusion Events and Define a Novel Type of Membrane MicrodomainFunction of Surfactant Proteins B and CGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsSpatiotemporal Regulation of Small GTPases as Revealed by Probes Based on the Principle of Förster Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET): Implications for Signaling and PharmacologySIGNALING PATHWAYS IN INTESTINAL DEVELOPMENT AND CANCERGenetic Determinants of Aggressive Breast CancerSIGNALING TO THE ACTIN CYTOSKELETONTHE POTENTIAL OF FARNESYLTRANSFERASE INHIBITORS AS CANCER CHEMOTHERAPEUTICSRegulation of Endothelial Nitric Oxide Synthase: Location, Location, LocationRegulation of Endothelial Nitric Oxide Synthase: Location, Location, LocationSilver Spoons and Other Personal ReflectionsG PROTEIN MECHANISMS: Insights from Structural AnalysisG PROTEIN MECHANISMS: Insights from Structural AnalysisMEMBRANE-ASSOCIATED GUANYLATE KINASES REGULATE ADHESION AND PLASTICITY AT CELL JUNCTIONSPDZ Domains and the Organization of Supramolecular ComplexesMolecular Mechanisms Underlying Neurotransmitter ReleaseChaperoning SNARE Folding and AssemblyMolecular Mechanisms of Fast Neurotransmitter ReleaseEndoplasmic Reticulum–Plasma Membrane Contact SitesEndoplasmic Reticulum–Plasma Membrane Associations: Structures and FunctionsThe Synaptic Vesicle Release MachineryMechanisms of Virus Membrane Fusion ProteinsMolecular Mechanisms for Synchronous, Asynchronous, and Spontaneous Neurotransmitter ReleaseEngineered Botulinum Neurotoxins as New TherapeuticsGTP-Dependent Membrane FusionThe Voltage-Gated Calcium Channel Functions as the Molecular Switch of Synaptic TransmissionPerspectives on Kiss-and-Run: Role in Exocytosis, Endocytosis, and NeurotransmissionThe Membrane Fusion Enigma: SNAREs, Sec1/Munc18 Proteins, and Their Accomplices—Guilty as Charged?Tethering Factors as Organizers of Intracellular Vesicular TrafficBotulinum Neurotoxin: A Marvel of Protein DesignConflicting Views on the Membrane Fusion Machinery and the Fusion PoreSingle-Molecule Studies of the Neuronal SNARE Fusion MachineryHow Does Synaptotagmin Trigger Neurotransmitter Release?FUSION PORES AND FUSION MACHINES IN CA2+-TRIGGERED EXOCYTOSISSNARE Protein Structure and FunctionCELL BIOLOGY OF THE PRESYNAPTIC TERMINALAutoinhibitory Domains: Modular Effectors of Cellular RegulationMembrane Fusion in Eukaryotic CellsMechanisms of Viral Membrane Fusion and Its InhibitionStructure of Proteins Involved in Synaptic Vesicle Fusion in NeuronsMechanisms of Synaptic Vesicle ExocytosisReceptor Binding and Membrane Fusion in Virus Entry: The Influenza HemagglutininYeast Homotypic Vacuole Fusion: A Window on Organelle Trafficking MechanismsMembrane Fusion and ExocytosisSNARE-Ware: The Role of SNARE-Domain Proteins in Plant BiologyNovel Lipid Modifications of Secreted Protein SignalsCOMPARTMENTALIZED RAS/MAPK SIGNALINGNovel Lipid Modifications of Secreted Protein SignalsFatty Acids and Immune Responses—A New Perspective in Searching for Clues to MechanismNovel Lipid Modifications of Secreted Protein SignalsREGULATION OF ENZYMES OF THE UREA CYCLE AND ARGININE METABOLISMNovel Lipid Modifications of Secreted Protein SignalsThe Regulator of G Protein Signaling Familyβ-ADRENERGIC RECEPTORS AND RECEPTOR SIGNALING IN HEART FAILUREG PROTEIN–COUPLED RECEPTOR KINASESG PROTEIN MECHANISMS: Insights from Structural AnalysisPOLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACID REGULATION OF GENES OF LIPID METABOLISMREGULATION OF GENE EXPRESSION BY DIETARY FATDNA Recognition by Cys2His2 Zinc Finger ProteinsTHE MOLECULAR BIOLOGY OF METAL ION TRANSPORT IN SACCHAROMYCES CEREVISIAEActin Assembly and Endocytosis: From Yeast to MammalsRegulation of G Protein–Initiated Signal Transduction in Yeast: Paradigms and PrinciplesCOMPARTMENTALIZED RAS/MAPK SIGNALINGCOMPARTMENTALIZED RAS/MAPK SIGNALINGSynthetic Lethal Vulnerabilities of CancerChemical Genetics–Based Target Identification in Drug DiscoveryProtein Homeostasis and the Phenotypic Manifestation of Genetic Diversity: Principles and MechanismsSystematic Mapping of Genetic Interaction NetworksReplicative Aging in Yeast: The Means to the EndA Bird's-Eye View of Sex Chromosome Dosage CompensationGenetics of Candida albicans, a Diploid Human Fungal PathogenGENOME-WIDE RESPONSES TO DNA-DAMAGING AGENTSDROSOPHILA NUTRIGENOMICS CAN PROVIDE CLUES TO HUMAN GENE-NUTRIENT INTERACTIONSPLANT GENOMICS: The Third WaveApplication of Microarray Technology in Environmental and Comparative PhysiologyG Proteins and Pheromone SignalingThe Genetic Architecture of Quantitative TraitsPATHOGEN FITNESS PENALTY AS A PREDICTOR OF DURABILITY OF DISEASE RESISTANCE GENESA NEW APPROACH TO DECODING LIFE: Systems BiologyTHE IMPACT OF MICROBIAL GENOMICS ON ANTIMICROBIAL DRUG DEVELOPMENTTHE GENETICS OF FATTY ACID METABOLISM IN SACCHAROMYCES CEREVISIAETHE GENETICS OF PEROXISOME BIOGENESISManganese Is Essential for Neuronal HealthThe Cell Biology of Synaptic Plasticity: AMPA Receptor TraffickingCOMPARTMENTALIZED RAS/MAPK SIGNALINGNovel Lipid Modifications of Secreted Protein SignalsThe State of Lipid Rafts: From Model Membranes to CellsConsidering Protonation as a Posttranslational Modification Regulating Protein Structure and FunctionMechanisms of Membrane Curvature SensingROLES OF BILAYER MATERIAL PROPERTIES IN FUNCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF MEMBRANE PROTEINSFatty Acids and Immune Responses—A New Perspective in Searching for Clues to MechanismG PROTEIN MECHANISMS: Insights from Structural Analysisβ-ADRENERGIC RECEPTORS AND RECEPTOR SIGNALING IN HEART FAILUREG PROTEIN MECHANISMS: Insights from Structural AnalysisROLES OF BILAYER MATERIAL PROPERTIES IN FUNCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF MEMBRANE PROTEINSThe State of Lipid Rafts: From Model Membranes to CellsFUNCTIONS OF LIPID RAFTS IN BIOLOGICAL MEMBRANESTHE CAVEOLAE MEMBRANE SYSTEMSINGLE-PARTICLE TRACKING:Applications to Membrane DynamicsTrafficking of Adhesion and Growth Factor Receptors and Their Effector KinasesFUNCTIONS OF LIPID RAFTS IN BIOLOGICAL MEMBRANESTHE CAVEOLAE MEMBRANE SYSTEMFUNCTIONS OF LIPID RAFTS IN BIOLOGICAL MEMBRANESTHE CAVEOLAE MEMBRANE SYSTEMCELLULAR FUNCTIONS REGULATED BY SRC FAMILY KINASESPI(4,5)P2 Clustering and Its Impact on Biological FunctionsROLES OF BILAYER MATERIAL PROPERTIES IN FUNCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF MEMBRANE PROTEINSPIP2 and Proteins: Interactions, Organization, and Information FlowThe Nutritional Significance of Lipid RaftsLocation is Everything: Lipid Rafts and Immune Cell SignalingROLES OF BILAYER MATERIAL PROPERTIES IN FUNCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF MEMBRANE PROTEINSCOMPARTMENTALIZED RAS/MAPK SIGNALINGMEMBRANE DOMAINSYeast Vacuole Inheritance and DynamicsLocation is Everything: Lipid Rafts and Immune Cell SignalingMalaria: Mechanisms of Erythrocytic Infection and Pathological Correlates of Severe DiseaseROLES OF BILAYER MATERIAL PROPERTIES IN FUNCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF MEMBRANE PROTEINSThe Immunological SynapseROLES OF BILAYER MATERIAL PROPERTIES IN FUNCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF MEMBRANE PROTEINSThe State of Lipid Rafts: From Model Membranes to CellsThe Nutritional Significance of Lipid RaftsOptical Probes for Molecular Processes in Live CellsLocation is Everything: Lipid Rafts and Immune Cell SignalingFATTY ACID TRANSPORT ACROSS MEMBRANES: Relevance to Nutrition and Metabolic PathologySignaling Microdomains in the Spotlight: Visualizing Compartmentalized Signaling Using Genetically Encoded Fluorescent BiosensorsImaging, Visualization, and Computation in Developmental BiologyUnderstanding the Role of Lipids in Signaling Through Atomistic and Multiscale Simulations of Cell MembranesOptical Nanoscopy: From Acquisition to AnalysisDevelopment of Probes for Cellular Functions Using Fluorescent Proteins and Fluorescence Resonance Energy TransferUse of Fluorescence Microscopy to Study Intracellular Signaling in BacteriaFluorescence Proteins, Live-Cell Imaging, and Mechanobiology: Seeing Is BelievingDETECTING MICRODOMAINS IN INTACT CELL MEMBRANESYeast Vacuole Inheritance and DynamicsThe State of Lipid Rafts: From Model Membranes to CellsLocation is Everything: Lipid Rafts and Immune Cell SignalingOptical Nanoscopy: From Acquisition to AnalysisDetecting Nanodomains in Living Cell Membrane by Fluorescence Correlation SpectroscopyCOMPARTMENTALIZED RAS/MAPK SIGNALINGMolecular Mechanics and Dynamics of Leukocyte Recruitment During InflammationDETECTING MICRODOMAINS IN INTACT CELL MEMBRANESMEMBRANE DOMAINSModel Systems, Lipid Rafts, and Cell MembranesCritical Phenomena in Plasma Membrane Organization and FunctionAntigen Receptor Function in the Context of the Nanoscale Organization of the B Cell MembraneMembrane Microdomains, Rafts, and Detergent-Resistant Membranes in Plants and FungiPhase Separation in Biological Membranes: Integration of Theory and ExperimentPhase Boundaries and Biological MembranesMalaria: Mechanisms of Erythrocytic Infection and Pathological Correlates of Severe DiseaseROLES OF BILAYER MATERIAL PROPERTIES IN FUNCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF MEMBRANE PROTEINSDETECTING MICRODOMAINS IN INTACT CELL MEMBRANESMEMBRANE DOMAINSModel Systems, Lipid Rafts, and Cell MembranesDisease-Related Misassembly of Membrane ProteinsSome Early History of Membrane Molecular BiologyLiquid-Liquid Immiscibility in MembranesThe State of Lipid Rafts: From Model Membranes to CellsGetting Ready for the Decade of the LipidsCO AS A CELLULAR SIGNALING MOLECULESIGNALING NETWORKS IN LIVING CELLSRegulation and Role of Adenylyl Cyclase IsoformsCompartmentation of G Protein-Coupled Signaling Pathways in Cardiac MyocytesFUNCTIONS OF LIPID RAFTS IN BIOLOGICAL MEMBRANESTHE CAVEOLAE MEMBRANE SYSTEMMechanisms of EndocytosisCaveolae as Organizers of Pharmacologically Relevant Signal Transduction MoleculesCOMPARTMENTALIZED RAS/MAPK SIGNALINGLiquid-Liquid Immiscibility in MembranesLocation is Everything: Lipid Rafts and Immune Cell SignalingSELECTIVITY IN NEUROTROPHIN SIGNALING: Theme and VariationsPhase Boundaries and Biological MembranesLocation is Everything: Lipid Rafts and Immune Cell SignalingSignal Transduction Mediated by the T Cell Antigen Receptor: The Role of Adapter ProteinsThe Immunological SynapseT Cell Activation and the CytoskeletonGENETIC ANALYSIS OF B CELL ANTIGEN RECEPTOR SIGNALINGFUNCTIONS OF LIPID RAFTS IN BIOLOGICAL MEMBRANESThe Role of ThPOK in Control of CD4/CD8 Lineage CommitmentCOMPARTMENTALIZED RAS/MAPK SIGNALINGLocation is Everything: Lipid Rafts and Immune Cell SignalingSignal Transduction Mediated by the T Cell Antigen Receptor: The Role of Adapter ProteinsRegulation of Phosphoinositide-Specific Phospholipase CThe Immunological SynapseLocation is Everything: Lipid Rafts and Immune Cell SignalingSignal Transduction Mediated by the T Cell Antigen Receptor: The Role of Adapter ProteinsThe Nutritional Significance of Lipid RaftsCOMPARTMENTALIZED RAS/MAPK SIGNALINGSecretory Protein Trafficking and Organelle Dynamics in Living CellsCOMPARTMENTALIZED RAS/MAPK SIGNALINGThe Posttranslational Processing of Prelamin A and DiseaseCOMPARTMENTALIZED RAS/MAPK SIGNALINGDevelopment of Probes for Cellular Functions Using Fluorescent Proteins and Fluorescence Resonance Energy TransferSpatiotemporal Regulation of Small GTPases as Revealed by Probes Based on the Principle of Förster Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET): Implications for Signaling and PharmacologyCOMPARTMENTALIZED RAS/MAPK SIGNALINGSIGNALING NETWORKS IN LIVING CELLSThe Role of Gβγ Subunits in the Organization, Assembly, and Function of GPCR Signaling ComplexesThe Role of Gβγ Subunits in the Organization, Assembly, and Function of GPCR Signaling ComplexesG Proteins and Pheromone SignalingRegulation of G Protein–Initiated Signal Transduction in Yeast: Paradigms and PrinciplesMammalian Phospholipase CREGULATION OF PHOSPHOLIPASE C ISOZYMES BY RAS SUPERFAMILY GTPASESINSIGHTS ON TRP CHANNELS FROM IN VIVO STUDIES IN DROSOPHILARegulation of Phosphoinositide-Specific Phospholipase CGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsG PROTEIN MECHANISMS: Insights from Structural AnalysisGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsThe Transduction Cascade in Retinal ON-Bipolar Cells: Signal Processing and DiseaseBiochemistry and Physiology of Cyclic Nucleotide Phosphodiesterases: Essential Components in Cyclic Nucleotide SignalingACCESSORY PROTEINS FOR G PROTEINS: Partners in SignalingSIGNALING FOR CONTRACTION AND RELAXATION IN SMOOTH MUSCLE OF THE GUTGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsROLES OF BILAYER MATERIAL PROPERTIES IN FUNCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF MEMBRANE PROTEINSYeast Vacuole Inheritance and DynamicsYeast Vacuole Inheritance and DynamicsStructures, Functions, and Dynamics of ESCRT-III/Vps4 Membrane Remodeling and Fission ComplexesMembrane Fission Reactions of the Mammalian ESCRT PathwayRegulation of G Protein–Initiated Signal Transduction in Yeast: Paradigms and PrinciplesAutophagy, Cytoplasm-to-Vacuole Targeting Pathway, and Pexophagy in Yeast and Mammalian CellsYeast Homotypic Vacuole Fusion: A Window on Organelle Trafficking MechanismsVacuolar Import of Proteins and Organelles From The CytoplasmAutophagy: Basic Principles and Relevance to DiseaseSNARE Protein Structure and FunctionFUSION PORES AND FUSION MACHINES IN CA2+-TRIGGERED EXOCYTOSISAcyl-CoA Metabolism and PartitioningYeast Homotypic Vacuole Fusion: A Window on Organelle Trafficking MechanismsMembrane Fusion: Five Lipids, Four SNAREs, Three Chaperones, Two Nucleotides, and a Rab, All Dancing in a Ring on Yeast VacuolesYeast Homotypic Vacuole Fusion: A Window on Organelle Trafficking MechanismsYeast Vacuole Inheritance and DynamicsAutophagy, Cytoplasm-to-Vacuole Targeting Pathway, and Pexophagy in Yeast and Mammalian CellsYeast Homotypic Vacuole Fusion: A Window on Organelle Trafficking MechanismsYeast Vacuole Inheritance and DynamicsYeast Vacuole Inheritance and DynamicsAutophagy, Cytoplasm-to-Vacuole Targeting Pathway, and Pexophagy in Yeast and Mammalian CellsSignals for Sorting of Transmembrane Proteins to Endosomes and LysosomesG PROTEIN MECHANISMS: Insights from Structural AnalysisCaveolae as Organizers of Pharmacologically Relevant Signal Transduction MoleculesGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsThe Regulator of G Protein Signaling FamilyFatty Acids and Immune Responses—A New Perspective in Searching for Clues to MechanismG PROTEIN–COUPLED RECEPTOR KINASESSTRUCTURE-FUNCTION ASPECTS IN THE NITRIC OXIDE SYNTHASESThe Cell Biology of Synaptic Plasticity: AMPA Receptor TraffickingMEMBRANE-ASSOCIATED GUANYLATE KINASES REGULATE ADHESION AND PLASTICITY AT CELL JUNCTIONSThe Neurobiology of Consolidations, Or, How Stable is the Engram?THE REGULATION AND PHARMACOLOGY OF ENDOTHELIAL NITRIC OXIDE SYNTHASETargeting KRAS DirectlyNovel Lipid Modifications of Secreted Protein SignalsFatty Acids and Immune Responses—A New Perspective in Searching for Clues to MechanismTHE POTENTIAL OF FARNESYLTRANSFERASE INHIBITORS AS CANCER CHEMOTHERAPEUTICSFatty Acids and Immune Responses—A New Perspective in Searching for Clues to MechanismLocation is Everything: Lipid Rafts and Immune Cell SignalingThe Regulator of G Protein Signaling FamilyG PROTEIN–COUPLED RECEPTOR KINASESMEMBRANE-ASSOCIATED GUANYLATE KINASES REGULATE ADHESION AND PLASTICITY AT CELL JUNCTIONSPDZ Domains and the Organization of Supramolecular ComplexesDirectional Recoil DetectionThe Bacterial Hsp90 Chaperone: Cellular Functions and Mechanism of ActionAntimicrobial Activity of Metals and MetalloidsThe Bacterial Hsp90 Chaperone: Cellular Functions and Mechanism of ActionFluid Dynamics of Respiratory Infectious DiseasesThe Contribution of Biophysics and Structural Biology to Current Advances in COVID-19Biomolecular Modeling and Simulation: A Prospering Multidisciplinary FieldBiomolecular Modeling and Simulation: A Prospering Multidisciplinary FieldFirst-Principles Insights into Plasmon-Induced CatalysisToxoplasma Mechanisms for Delivery of Proteins and Uptake of Nutrients Across the Host-Pathogen InterfaceChemical Mediators at the Bacterial-Fungal InterfaceHow Does the Ribosome Fold the Proteome?Electrochemistry of Single-Vesicle EventsReproductive Multitasking: The Female GametophyteExploiting Broad-Spectrum Disease Resistance in Crops: From Molecular Dissection to BreedingExploiting Broad-Spectrum Disease Resistance in Crops: From Molecular Dissection to BreedingExploiting Broad-Spectrum Disease Resistance in Crops: From Molecular Dissection to BreedingExploiting Broad-Spectrum Disease Resistance in Crops: From Molecular Dissection to BreedingExploiting Broad-Spectrum Disease Resistance in Crops: From Molecular Dissection to BreedingDry Aligning Dilute Active MatterBalancing Disturbance and Conservation in Agroecosystems to Improve Biological ControlInfluence of Nesting Characteristics on Health of Wild Bee CommunitiesUpdate on the Animal Models and Underlying Mechanisms for ZIKV-Induced MicrocephalyGenetic Predisposition to Childhood Cancer in the Genomic EraGenetic Predisposition to Childhood Cancer in the Genomic EraGenetic Predisposition to Childhood Cancer in the Genomic EraGenetic Predisposition to Childhood Cancer in the Genomic EraCancer Treatment in the Genomic EraMechanisms of Cotranslational Maturation of Newly Synthesized ProteinsChiral Plasmonic Nanostructures Enabled by Bottom-Up ApproachesLaser Desorption Combined with Laser Postionization for Mass SpectrometryRadical S-Adenosylmethionine Enzymes in Human Health and DiseaseNew Technologies in Gravitational-Wave DetectionBrachypodium distachyon and Setaria viridis: Model Genetic Systems for the GrassesMolecular Mechanisms in Genetically Defined Autoinflammatory Diseases: Disorders of Amplified Danger SignalingEpisodic and Electrical Nervous System Disorders Caused by Nonchannel GenesBehavior Genetics and the Domestication of AnimalsQuantum Interfaces Between Atomic and Solid-State SystemsWater and Energy InteractionsWater and Energy InteractionsPlant Nucleotide Sugar Formation, Interconversion, and Salvage by Sugar Recycling*Evolution of PhotosynthesisSex Chromosomes in Land PlantsIndustry, Environmental Policy, and Environmental OutcomesFeedbacks of Terrestrial Ecosystems to Climate ChangeRenewable Energy Futures: Targets, Scenarios, and PathwaysModels of Decision Making and Residential Energy UseAggresomes and Pericentriolar Sites of Virus Assembly: Cellular Defense or Viral Design?Aggresomes and Pericentriolar Sites of Virus Assembly: Cellular Defense or Viral Design?Aggresomes and Pericentriolar Sites of Virus Assembly: Cellular Defense or Viral Design?Identifying Microorganisms Involved in Specific Pathogen Suppression in SoilSafety of Virus-Resistant Transgenic Plants Two Decades After Their Introduction: Lessons from Realistic Field Risk Assessment StudiesIdentifying Microorganisms Involved in Specific Pathogen Suppression in SoilIdentifying Microorganisms Involved in Specific Pathogen Suppression in SoilIdentifying Microorganisms Involved in Specific Pathogen Suppression in SoilTell Me Again What It Is That You DoFerroelectric Epitaxial Thin Films for Integrated OpticsMicroscale Characterization of Mechanical PropertiesMicroscale Characterization of Mechanical PropertiesThree-Dimensional Atom-Probe Tomography: Advances and ApplicationsDefect–Domain Wall Interactions in Trigonal FerroelectricsMicroscale Characterization of Mechanical PropertiesSpiral Magnets as MagnetoelectricsAtomic-Level Simulation of Ferroelectricity in Oxides: Current Status and OpportunitiesFunctions of Site-Specific Histone Acetylation and DeacetylationFunctions of Site-Specific Histone Acetylation and DeacetylationThe tmRNA System for Translational Surveillance and Ribosome RescueCellular Responses to Viral Infection in Humans: Lessons from Epstein-Barr VirusImmunobiology of Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cell TransplantationCellular Responses to Viral Infection in Humans: Lessons from Epstein-Barr VirusCellular Responses to Viral Infection in Humans: Lessons from Epstein-Barr VirusCellular Responses to Viral Infection in Humans: Lessons from Epstein-Barr VirusImmunologically Active Autoantigens: The Role of Toll-Like Receptors in the Development of Chronic Inflammatory DiseaseIL-17 Family Cytokines and the Expanding Diversity of Effector T Cell LineagesBiology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Biology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Biology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Biology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Biology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Biology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Biology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Biology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Biology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Biology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Biology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)The Use of Push-Pull Strategies in Integrated Pest ManagementBiology and Evolution of AdelgidaeBiology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Biology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)The Use of Push-Pull Strategies in Integrated Pest ManagementThe Use of Push-Pull Strategies in Integrated Pest ManagementBiology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Biology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Biology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Current Status of the Myriapod Class Diplopoda (Millipedes): Taxonomic Diversity and PhylogenyCurrent Status of the Myriapod Class Diplopoda (Millipedes): Taxonomic Diversity and PhylogenyCurrent Status of the Myriapod Class Diplopoda (Millipedes): Taxonomic Diversity and PhylogenyCurrent Status of the Myriapod Class Diplopoda (Millipedes): Taxonomic Diversity and PhylogenyAMORPHOUS POROUS MIXED OXIDES: Sol-Gel Ways to a Highly Versatile Class of Materials and CatalystsAMORPHOUS POROUS MIXED OXIDES: Sol-Gel Ways to a Highly Versatile Class of Materials and CatalystsAMORPHOUS POROUS MIXED OXIDES: Sol-Gel Ways to a Highly Versatile Class of Materials and CatalystsHYDROGEN IN METALS: Microstructural AspectsMICROGELS: Old Materials with New ApplicationsPROGRESS IN MICROSTRUCTURED OPTICAL FIBERSMICROGELS: Old Materials with New ApplicationsHYDROGEN IN METALS: Microstructural AspectsMICROGELS: Old Materials with New ApplicationsMICROGELS: Old Materials with New ApplicationsPROGRESS IN MICROSTRUCTURED OPTICAL FIBERSPROGRESS IN MICROSTRUCTURED OPTICAL FIBERSFERROELASTIC DOMAIN STRUCTURE AND SWITCHING IN EPITAXIAL FERROELECTRIC THIN FILMSPOSITRON ANNIHILATION AS A METHOD TO CHARACTERIZE POROUS MATERIALSAMORPHOUS POROUS MIXED OXIDES: Sol-Gel Ways to a Highly Versatile Class of Materials and CatalystsBreak-Induced Replication and Recombinational Telomere Elongation in YeastRADIOLYTIC PROTEIN FOOTPRINTING WITH MASS SPECTROMETRY TO PROBE THE STRUCTURE OF MACROMOLECULAR COMPLEXESRADIOLYTIC PROTEIN FOOTPRINTING WITH MASS SPECTROMETRY TO PROBE THE STRUCTURE OF MACROMOLECULAR COMPLEXESSYMMETRY, FORM, AND SHAPE: Guiding Principles for Robustness in Macromolecular MachinesFUSION PORES AND FUSION MACHINES IN CA2+-TRIGGERED EXOCYTOSISRADIOLYTIC PROTEIN FOOTPRINTING WITH MASS SPECTROMETRY TO PROBE THE STRUCTURE OF MACROMOLECULAR COMPLEXESMECHANOTRANSDUCTION INVOLVING MULTIMODULAR PROTEINS: Converting Force into Biochemical SignalsSPINACH ON THE CEILING: A Theoretical Chemist's Return to BiologyRADIOLYTIC PROTEIN FOOTPRINTING WITH MASS SPECTROMETRY TO PROBE THE STRUCTURE OF MACROMOLECULAR COMPLEXESRADIOLYTIC PROTEIN FOOTPRINTING WITH MASS SPECTROMETRY TO PROBE THE STRUCTURE OF MACROMOLECULAR COMPLEXESRelating Protein Motion to CatalysisRADIOLYTIC PROTEIN FOOTPRINTING WITH MASS SPECTROMETRY TO PROBE THE STRUCTURE OF MACROMOLECULAR COMPLEXESMechanisms of Site-Specific RecombinationRADIOLYTIC PROTEIN FOOTPRINTING WITH MASS SPECTROMETRY TO PROBE THE STRUCTURE OF MACROMOLECULAR COMPLEXESLKB1-Dependent Signaling PathwaysLKB1-Dependent Signaling PathwaysNMR TECHNIQUES FOR VERY LARGE PROTEINS AND RNAS IN SOLUTIONNMR TECHNIQUES FOR VERY LARGE PROTEINS AND RNAS IN SOLUTIONNMR TECHNIQUES FOR VERY LARGE PROTEINS AND RNAS IN SOLUTIONRelating Protein Motion to CatalysisSYMMETRY, FORM, AND SHAPE: Guiding Principles for Robustness in Macromolecular MachinesLKB1-Dependent Signaling PathwaysLKB1-Dependent Signaling PathwaysAsparagine Synthetase ChemotherapyRIBOSOME DYNAMICS: Insights from Atomic Structure Modeling into Cryo-Electron Microscopy MapsAxonal Transport and Alzheimer's DiseaseNMR TECHNIQUES FOR VERY LARGE PROTEINS AND RNAS IN SOLUTIONSYMMETRY, FORM, AND SHAPE: Guiding Principles for Robustness in Macromolecular MachinesNMR TECHNIQUES FOR VERY LARGE PROTEINS AND RNAS IN SOLUTIONEXCITONS IN CONJUGATED OLIGOMER AGGREGATES, FILMS, AND CRYSTALSSTARK DECELERATION AND TRAPPING OF OH RADICALSSTARK DECELERATION AND TRAPPING OF OH RADICALSION PAIR DISSOCIATION: Spectroscopy and DynamicsGENETIC DISORDERS OF PROGRAMMED CELL DEATH IN THE IMMUNE SYSTEMINTESTINAL AND PULMONARY MUCOSAL T CELLS: Local Heroes Fight to Maintain the Status QuoMEASURING POPULATION HEALTH: A Review of IndicatorsMEASURING POPULATION HEALTH: A Review of IndicatorsMEASURING POPULATION HEALTH: A Review of IndicatorsMEASURING POPULATION HEALTH: A Review of IndicatorsMEASURING POPULATION HEALTH: A Review of IndicatorsMEASURING POPULATION HEALTH: A Review of IndicatorsPREVENTIVE CARE FOR CHILDREN IN THE UNITED STATES: Quality and BarriersGENETIC DISORDERS OF PROGRAMMED CELL DEATH IN THE IMMUNE SYSTEMMEASURING POPULATION HEALTH: A Review of IndicatorsSPEED, ROAD INJURY, AND PUBLIC HEALTHSPEED, ROAD INJURY, AND PUBLIC HEALTHMEASURING POPULATION HEALTH: A Review of IndicatorsPUBLIC REPORTING OF PROVIDER PERFORMANCE: Can Its Impact Be Made Greater?MULTIPLEXED PROTEIN ARRAY PLATFORMS FOR ANALYSIS OF AUTOIMMUNE DISEASESMULTIPLEXED PROTEIN ARRAY PLATFORMS FOR ANALYSIS OF AUTOIMMUNE DISEASESMULTIPLEXED PROTEIN ARRAY PLATFORMS FOR ANALYSIS OF AUTOIMMUNE DISEASESSTRESS, FATIGUE, HEALTH, AND RISK OF ROAD TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS AMONG PROFESSIONAL DRIVERS: The Contribution of Physical InactivitySTRESS, FATIGUE, HEALTH, AND RISK OF ROAD TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS AMONG PROFESSIONAL DRIVERS: The Contribution of Physical InactivityTHE POLITICS OF PUBLIC HEALTH POLICYAID TO PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Medicaid's Growing RoleAID TO PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Medicaid's Growing RoleMEASURING POPULATION HEALTH: A Review of IndicatorsTHE TORTUOUS JOURNEY OF A BIOCHEMIST TO IMMUNOLAND AND WHAT HE FOUND THEREAID TO PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Medicaid's Growing RoleAID TO PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Medicaid's Growing RoleSEVERE SEPSIS AND SEPTIC SHOCK: The Role of Gram-Negative BacteremiaSEVERE SEPSIS AND SEPTIC SHOCK: The Role of Gram-Negative BacteremiaSEVERE SEPSIS AND SEPTIC SHOCK: The Role of Gram-Negative BacteremiaProstatitis/Chronic Pelvic Pain SyndromePROTEASES IN PARASITIC DISEASESToward a Unified Theory of Renal ProgressionPATHOGENESIS OF NONIMMUNE GLOMERULOPATHIESThe Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) Privacy Rule: Implications for Clinical ResearchCeliac DiseaseToward a Unified Theory of Renal ProgressionPlant, Synthetic, and Endogenous Cannabinoids in MedicineToward a Unified Theory of Renal ProgressionThe Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) Privacy Rule: Implications for Clinical ResearchCardiotoxicity Induced by Chemotherapy and Antibody TherapyAvian Flu to Human InfluenzaBRAINSTEM CIRCUITS REGULATING GASTRIC FUNCTIONAN INTRODUCTION TO TRP CHANNELSAN INTRODUCTION TO TRP CHANNELSCARDIAC REGENERATION: Repopulating the HeartSIGNALING AND FUNCTION OF INSULIN-LIKE PEPTIDES IN INSECTSPROSTAGLANDINS AND OTHER EICOSANOIDS IN INSECTS: Biological SignificanceBRAINSTEM CIRCUITS REGULATING GASTRIC FUNCTIONTACHINIDAE: Evolution, Behavior, and EcologyDOPA DECARBOXYLASE: A Model Gene-Enzyme System for Studying Development, Behavior, and SystematicsSIGNALING AND FUNCTION OF INSULIN-LIKE PEPTIDES IN INSECTSCARDIAC REGENERATION: Repopulating the HeartDOPA DECARBOXYLASE: A Model Gene-Enzyme System for Studying Development, Behavior, and SystematicsROLE OF FXYD PROTEINS IN ION TRANSPORTFROM MICE TO MEN: Insights into the Insulin Resistance SyndromesRNA-Guided DNA Deletion in Tetrahymena: An RNAi-Based Mechanism for Programmed Genome RearrangementsConcerted and Birth-and-Death Evolution of Multigene FamiliesTOOLS FOR THE SIMULATION OF HARD HADRONIC COLLISIONSTHE ROLE OF PROTECTED AREAS IN CONSERVING BIODIVERSITY AND SUSTAINING LOCAL LIVELIHOODSTHE ROLE OF PROTECTED AREAS IN CONSERVING BIODIVERSITY AND SUSTAINING LOCAL LIVELIHOODSENVIRONMENTAL VALUESREGIONAL ATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION AND TRANSBOUNDARY AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENTPRIVATE-SECTOR PARTICIPATION IN THE WATER AND SANITATION SECTORREGIONAL ATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION AND TRANSBOUNDARY AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENTREGIONAL ATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION AND TRANSBOUNDARY AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENTPRIVATE-SECTOR PARTICIPATION IN THE WATER AND SANITATION SECTORARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBAL CHANGE: The Holocene RecordTHE ROLE OF PROTECTED AREAS IN CONSERVING BIODIVERSITY AND SUSTAINING LOCAL LIVELIHOODSTHE ROLE OF PROTECTED AREAS IN CONSERVING BIODIVERSITY AND SUSTAINING LOCAL LIVELIHOODSREGIONAL ATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION AND TRANSBOUNDARY AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENTENVIRONMENTAL VALUESREGIONAL ATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION AND TRANSBOUNDARY AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENTBIOGENESIS OF INNER MEMBRANE PROTEINS IN ESCHERICHIA COLIBIOGENESIS OF INNER MEMBRANE PROTEINS IN ESCHERICHIA COLIBIOGENESIS OF INNER MEMBRANE PROTEINS IN ESCHERICHIA COLICLINICAL AND TOXICOLOGICAL RELEVANCE OF CYP2C9: Drug-Drug Interactions and PharmacogeneticsPlant Disease: A Threat to Global Food SecurityPlant Disease: A Threat to Global Food SecurityPlant Disease: A Threat to Global Food SecurityHUMAN TASTE GENETICSRNA Silencing in Productive Virus InfectionsHUMAN TASTE GENETICSRNA Silencing in Productive Virus InfectionsBIG CAT GENOMICSTHE GENETIC BASIS FOR CARDIAC REMODELINGBIG CAT GENOMICSCOMPLEX GENETICS OF GLAUCOMA SUSCEPTIBILITYPOLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACID REGULATION OF GENES OF LIPID METABOLISMPOLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACID REGULATION OF GENES OF LIPID METABOLISMUPTAKE, LOCALIZATION, AND NONCARBOXYLASE ROLES OF BIOTINREDOX REGULATION BY INTRINSIC SPECIES AND EXTRINSIC NUTRIENTS IN NORMAL AND CANCER CELLSPOLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACID REGULATION OF GENES OF LIPID METABOLISMPOLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACID REGULATION OF GENES OF LIPID METABOLISMPOLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACID REGULATION OF GENES OF LIPID METABOLISMPOLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACID REGULATION OF GENES OF LIPID METABOLISMPOLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACID REGULATION OF GENES OF LIPID METABOLISMDIETARY FIBER: How Did We Get Where We Are?REDOX REGULATION BY INTRINSIC SPECIES AND EXTRINSIC NUTRIENTS IN NORMAL AND CANCER CELLSPOLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACID REGULATION OF GENES OF LIPID METABOLISMMolecular Mechanics and Dynamics of Leukocyte Recruitment During InflammationMETAL CATALYST DESIGN AND PREPARATION IN CONTROL OF DEACTIVATIONMETAL CATALYST DESIGN AND PREPARATION IN CONTROL OF DEACTIVATIONADHESION AND DE-ADHESION MECHANISMS AT POLYMER/METAL INTERFACES: Mechanistic Understanding Based on In Situ Studies of Buried InterfacesPOROUS ALUMINOPHOSPHATES :From Molecular Sieves to Designed Acid CatalystsELECTRON MICROSCOPY IN THE CATALYSIS OF ALKANE OXIDATION, ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL, AND ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SOURCESMETAL CATALYST DESIGN AND PREPARATION IN CONTROL OF DEACTIVATIONELECTRON MICROSCOPY IN THE CATALYSIS OF ALKANE OXIDATION, ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL, AND ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SOURCESMETAL CATALYST DESIGN AND PREPARATION IN CONTROL OF DEACTIVATIONCOMPOSITE MATERIALS FOR WIND POWER TURBINE BLADESCOMPOSITE MATERIALS FOR WIND POWER TURBINE BLADESCHEMICAL DESIGN AND IN SITU CHARACTERIZATION OF ACTIVE SURFACES FOR SELECTIVE CATALYSISPOROUS ALUMINOPHOSPHATES :From Molecular Sieves to Designed Acid CatalystsPOROUS ALUMINOPHOSPHATES :From Molecular Sieves to Designed Acid CatalystsSTRUCTURE, FUNCTION, AND FORMATION OF BIOLOGICAL IRON-SULFUR CLUSTERSPLANT-SPECIFIC CALMODULIN-BINDING PROTEINSENDOCYTOTIC CYCLING OF PM PROTEINSTHE STRUCTURAL BIOLOGY OF TYPE II FATTY ACID BIOSYNTHESISSTRUCTURAL STUDIES BY ELECTRON TOMOGRAPHY: From Cells to MoleculesMembrane-Protein Interactions in Cell Signaling and Membrane TraffickingPLANT-SPECIFIC CALMODULIN-BINDING PROTEINSPLANT-SPECIFIC CALMODULIN-BINDING PROTEINSMembrane-Protein Interactions in Cell Signaling and Membrane TraffickingNONTEMPLATE-DEPENDENT POLYMERIZATION PROCESSES: Polyhydroxyalkanoate Synthases as a ParadigmThe Structure-Function Dilemma of the Hammerhead RibozymePROTEIN FAMILIES AND THEIR EVOLUTION—A STRUCTURAL PERSPECTIVEMONITORING ENERGY BALANCE: Metabolites of Fatty Acid Synthesis as Hypothalamic SensorsNONSTATISTICAL DYNAMICS IN THERMAL REACTIONS OF POLYATOMIC MOLECULESULTRAFAST ELECTRON TRANSFER AT THE MOLECULE-SEMICONDUCTOR NANOPARTICLE INTERFACEULTRAFAST ELECTRON TRANSFER AT THE MOLECULE-SEMICONDUCTOR NANOPARTICLE INTERFACEULTRAFAST ELECTRON TRANSFER AT THE MOLECULE-SEMICONDUCTOR NANOPARTICLE INTERFACEFOURIER TRANSFORM INFRARED VIBRATIONAL SPECTROSCOPIC IMAGING: Integrating Microscopy and Molecular RecognitionAB INITIO QUANTUM CHEMICAL AND MIXED QUANTUM MECHANICS/MOLECULAR MECHANICS (QM/MM) METHODS FOR STUDYING ENZYMATIC CATALYSISQUANTUM MODE-COUPLING THEORY: Formulation and Applications to Normal and Supercooled Quantum LiquidsFOURIER TRANSFORM INFRARED VIBRATIONAL SPECTROSCOPIC IMAGING: Integrating Microscopy and Molecular RecognitionMETAL TO INSULATOR TRANSITIONS IN CLUSTERSMETAL TO INSULATOR TRANSITIONS IN CLUSTERSULTRAFAST ELECTRON TRANSFER AT THE MOLECULE-SEMICONDUCTOR NANOPARTICLE INTERFACEULTRAFAST ELECTRON TRANSFER AT THE MOLECULE-SEMICONDUCTOR NANOPARTICLE INTERFACEEMF AND HEALTHA LIFE COURSE APPROACH TO CHRONIC DISEASE EPIDEMIOLOGYCOMPETING DIETARY CLAIMS FOR WEIGHT LOSS: Finding the Forest Through Truculent TreesURBAN HEALTH: Evidence, Challenges, and DirectionsIMPACT OF NICOTINE REPLACEMENT THERAPY ON SMOKING BEHAVIORIMPACT OF NICOTINE REPLACEMENT THERAPY ON SMOKING BEHAVIORADVANCES IN RISK ASSESSMENT AND COMMUNICATIONADVANCES IN RISK ASSESSMENT AND COMMUNICATIONA LIFE COURSE APPROACH TO CHRONIC DISEASE EPIDEMIOLOGYPATIENT PERCEPTIONS OF THE QUALITY OF HEALTH SERVICESCOMPETING DIETARY CLAIMS FOR WEIGHT LOSS: Finding the Forest Through Truculent TreesIMPACT OF NICOTINE REPLACEMENT THERAPY ON SMOKING BEHAVIORCATERPILLER: A Novel Gene Family Important in Immunity, Cell Death, and DiseasesHOW NEUTROPHILS KILL MICROBESREGULATION OF LYMPHOID DEVELOPMENT, DIFFERENTIATION, AND FUNCTION BY THE NOTCH PATHWAYLESSONS IN ESTROGEN BIOLOGY FROM KNOCKOUT AND TRANSGENIC ANIMALSLUNG VASCULAR DEVELOPMENT: Implications for the Pathogenesis of Bronchopulmonary DysplasiaLUNG VASCULAR DEVELOPMENT: Implications for the Pathogenesis of Bronchopulmonary DysplasiaLUNG VASCULAR DEVELOPMENT: Implications for the Pathogenesis of Bronchopulmonary DysplasiaCHEMICAL PHYSIOLOGY OF BLOOD FLOW REGULATION BY RED BLOOD CELLS:CHEMICAL PHYSIOLOGY OF BLOOD FLOW REGULATION BY RED BLOOD CELLS:LUNG VASCULAR DEVELOPMENT: Implications for the Pathogenesis of Bronchopulmonary DysplasiaRole of Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Immunotherapy in Treating Multiple SclerosisRole of Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Immunotherapy in Treating Multiple SclerosisApplication of Microbial Genomic Science to Advanced TherapeuticsGene Therapy for Severe Combined ImmunodeficiencyRole of Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Immunotherapy in Treating Multiple SclerosisAromatase Inhibitors: Rationale and Use in Breast CancerAtrial Fibrillation: Modern Concepts and ManagementEVOLUTIONARY AND MECHANISTIC THEORIES OF AGINGEVOLUTIONARY AND MECHANISTIC THEORIES OF AGINGEGG DUMPING IN INSECTSEGG DUMPING IN INSECTSEGG DUMPING IN INSECTSNATURAL HISTORY OF PLAGUE: Perspectives from More than a Century of ResearchNATURAL HISTORY OF PLAGUE: Perspectives from More than a Century of ResearchNATURAL HISTORY OF PLAGUE: Perspectives from More than a Century of ResearchNATURAL HISTORY OF PLAGUE: Perspectives from More than a Century of ResearchFECAL RESIDUES OF VETERINARY PARASITICIDES: Nontarget Effects in the Pasture EnvironmentEVOLUTIONARY AND MECHANISTIC THEORIES OF AGINGTHE MEVALONATE PATHWAY AND THE SYNTHESIS OF JUVENILE HORMONE IN INSECTSBIOLOGY AND MANAGEMENT OF INSECT PESTS IN NORTH AMERICAN INTENSIVELY MANAGED HARDWOOD FOREST SYSTEMS,SYSTEMATICS, EVOLUTION, AND BIOLOGY OF SCELIONID AND PLATYGASTRID WASPSINVASIVE PHYTOPHAGOUS PESTS ARISING THROUGH A RECENT TROPICAL EVOLUTIONARY RADIATION: The Bactrocera dorsalis Complex of Fruit FliesMOSQUITO BEHAVIOR AND VECTOR CONTROLMECHANISMS OF HOPPERBURN: An Overview of Insect Taxonomy, Behavior, and PhysiologyTSETSE GENETICS: Contributions to Biology, Systematics, and Control of Tsetse FliesCHEMICAL ECOLOGY OF LOCUSTS AND RELATED ACRIDIDSTHE EVOLUTION OF MALE TRAITS IN SOCIAL INSECTSEGG DUMPING IN INSECTSEGG DUMPING IN INSECTSEGG DUMPING IN INSECTSEGG DUMPING IN INSECTSEGG DUMPING IN INSECTSEVOLUTIONARY AND MECHANISTIC THEORIES OF AGINGELECTROMAGNETIC FORM FACTORS OF THE NUCLEON AND COMPTON SCATTERINGMitochondria of ProtistsTRACING NOBLE GAS RADIONUCLIDES IN THE ENVIRONMENTChlamydomonas reinhardtii in the Landscape of PigmentsGRAVITATIONAL WAVE ASTRONOMYTHE NUCLEAR STRUCTURE OF HEAVY-ACTINIDE AND TRANS ACTINIDE NUCLEITHE NUCLEAR STRUCTURE OF HEAVY-ACTINIDE AND TRANS ACTINIDE NUCLEIThe Genetics of GeochemistryThe Genetics of GeochemistryMitochondria of ProtistsTHE NUCLEAR STRUCTURE OF HEAVY-ACTINIDE AND TRANS ACTINIDE NUCLEITHE NUCLEAR STRUCTURE OF HEAVY-ACTINIDE AND TRANS ACTINIDE NUCLEIThe Genetics of GeochemistryThe Genetics of GeochemistryThe Genetics of GeochemistryGRAVITATIONAL WAVE ASTRONOMYTHE NUCLEAR STRUCTURE OF HEAVY-ACTINIDE AND TRANS ACTINIDE NUCLEITHE NUCLEAR STRUCTURE OF HEAVY-ACTINIDE AND TRANS ACTINIDE NUCLEITHE NUCLEAR STRUCTURE OF HEAVY-ACTINIDE AND TRANS ACTINIDE NUCLEIThe Genetics of GeochemistryGRAVITATIONAL WAVE ASTRONOMYTHE NUCLEAR STRUCTURE OF HEAVY-ACTINIDE AND TRANS ACTINIDE NUCLEITRACING NOBLE GAS RADIONUCLIDES IN THE ENVIRONMENTThe Genetics of GeochemistryThe Genetics of GeochemistryMelanocytes and the Microphthalmia Transcription Factor NetworkGRAVITATIONAL WAVE ASTRONOMYMitochondria of ProtistsMobile Group II IntronsTHE NUCLEAR STRUCTURE OF HEAVY-ACTINIDE AND TRANS ACTINIDE NUCLEIRepair and Genetic Consequences of Endogenous DNA Base Damage in Mammalian CellsENERGY MANAGEMENT AND GLOBAL HEALTHPROSPECTS FOR CARBON CAPTURE AND STORAGE TECHNOLOGIESPLANT GENETIC RESOURCES FOR FOOD AND AGRICULTURE: Assessing Global AvailabilityASSESSING THE COSTS OF ELECTRICITYRibosomal Crystallography: Initiation, Peptide Bond Formation, and Amino Acid Polymerization are Hampered by AntibioticsJohne's Disease, Inflammatory Bowel Disease, and Mycobacterium paratuberculosisAnaerobic Microbial DehalogenationMolecular and Cellular Basis of Bartonella PathogenesisJohne's Disease, Inflammatory Bowel Disease, and Mycobacterium paratuberculosisJohne's Disease, Inflammatory Bowel Disease, and Mycobacterium paratuberculosisAnaerobic Microbial DehalogenationJohne's Disease, Inflammatory Bowel Disease, and Mycobacterium paratuberculosisJohne's Disease, Inflammatory Bowel Disease, and Mycobacterium paratuberculosisThe Ecology and Genetics of Microbial DiversityCOMPARATIVE PRIMATE GENOMICSPLANT GENOMICS: The Third WaveMEDICAL GENETICS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIESMEDICAL GENETICS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIESMEDICAL GENETICS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIESPLANT GENOMICS: The Third WaveMEDICAL GENETICS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIESMEDICAL GENETICS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIESGENETIC SCREENING: Carriers and Affected IndividualsPLANT VIRUS SATELLITE AND DEFECTIVE INTERFERING RNAS: New Paradigms for a New CenturyMICROBIAL DIVERSITY IN SOIL: Selection of Microbial Populations by Plant and Soil Type and Implications for Disease SuppressivenessPLANT VIRUS SATELLITE AND DEFECTIVE INTERFERING RNAS: New Paradigms for a New CenturyOcular Biomechanics and BiotransportTissue Growth and RemodelingMolecular MachinesFunctional Efficacy of Tendon Repair ProcessesTHERMAL TRANSPORT IN NANOFLUIDSSEMICONDUCTOR NANOWIRES AND NANOTUBESUNUSUAL PROPERTIES AND STRUCTURE OF CARBON NANOTUBESSELF-ASSEMBLED SEMICONDUCTOR QUANTUM DOTS: Fundamental Physics and Device ApplicationsSEMICONDUCTOR NANOWIRES AND NANOTUBESUNUSUAL PROPERTIES AND STRUCTURE OF CARBON NANOTUBESMODELING AND SIMULATION OF BIOMATERIALSTHERMAL TRANSPORT IN NANOFLUIDSTHERMAL TRANSPORT IN NANOFLUIDSNUTRITION AND CANCER PREVENTION: A Multidisciplinary Perspective on Human TrialsENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS THAT INCREASE THE FOOD INTAKE AND CONSUMPTION VOLUME OF UNKNOWING CONSUMERSDEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS AND FACTORS INFLUENCING THE SYNTHESIS AND STATUS OF ASCORBIC ACID IN THE PIGVITAMIN B12 DEFICIENCY AS A WORLDWIDE PROBLEMAMERICA'S OBESITY: Conflicting Public Policies, Industrial Economic Development, and Unintended Human ConsequencesAMERICA'S OBESITY: Conflicting Public Policies, Industrial Economic Development, and Unintended Human ConsequencesTHE CRITICAL ROLE OF THE MELANOCORTIN SYSTEM IN THE CONTROL OF ENERGY BALANCETHE CRITICAL ROLE OF THE MELANOCORTIN SYSTEM IN THE CONTROL OF ENERGY BALANCEZINC AND THE RISK FOR INFECTIOUS DISEASEVITAMIN B12 DEFICIENCY AS A WORLDWIDE PROBLEMREGULATION OF CATIONIC AMINO ACID TRANSPORT: The Story of the CAT-1 TransporterAMERICA'S OBESITY: Conflicting Public Policies, Industrial Economic Development, and Unintended Human ConsequencesAMERICA'S OBESITY: Conflicting Public Policies, Industrial Economic Development, and Unintended Human ConsequencesDEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS AND FACTORS INFLUENCING THE SYNTHESIS AND STATUS OF ASCORBIC ACID IN THE PIGAMERICA'S OBESITY: Conflicting Public Policies, Industrial Economic Development, and Unintended Human ConsequencesAMERICA'S OBESITY: Conflicting Public Policies, Industrial Economic Development, and Unintended Human ConsequencesTHE CRITICAL ROLE OF THE MELANOCORTIN SYSTEM IN THE CONTROL OF ENERGY BALANCENUTRITION AND CANCER PREVENTION: A Multidisciplinary Perspective on Human TrialsBIOACTIVE COMPOUNDS IN NUTRITION AND HEALTH-RESEARCH METHODOLOGIES FOR ESTABLISHING BIOLOGICAL FUNCTION: The Antioxidant and Anti-inflammatory Effects of Flavonoids on AtherosclerosisCALCIUM AND BONE MINERAL METABOLISM IN CHILDREN WITH CHRONIC ILLNESSESAMERICA'S OBESITY: Conflicting Public Policies, Industrial Economic Development, and Unintended Human ConsequencesAMERICA'S OBESITY: Conflicting Public Policies, Industrial Economic Development, and Unintended Human ConsequencesVITAMIN B12 DEFICIENCY AS A WORLDWIDE PROBLEMTethering: Fragment-Based Drug DiscoveryInformation Content and Complexity in the High-Order Organization of DNATethering: Fragment-Based Drug DiscoveryDisease-Related Misassembly of Membrane ProteinsConformational Spread: The Propagation of Allosteric States in Large Multiprotein ComplexesMass Spectral Analysis in ProteomicsSpin Distribution and the Location of Protons in Paramagnetic ProteinsSpin Distribution and the Location of Protons in Paramagnetic ProteinsSpin Distribution and the Location of Protons in Paramagnetic ProteinsNuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy of High-Molecular-Weight ProteinsPyridoxal Phosphate Enzymes: Mechanistic, Structural, and Evolutionary ConsiderationsThe Molecular Mechanics of Eukaryotic TranslationNuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy of High-Molecular-Weight ProteinsUsing Protein Folding Rates to Test Protein Folding TheoriesInositol 1,4,5-Trisphosphate Receptors as Signal IntegratorsIncorporation of Nonnatural Amino Acids Into ProteinsThe Sir2 Family of Protein DeacetylasesEukaryotic mRNA DecappingNuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy of High-Molecular-Weight ProteinsStructural Aspects of Ligand Binding to and Electron Transfer in Bacterial and Fungal P450sRoles of N-Linked Glycans in the Endoplasmic ReticulumIncorporation of Nonnatural Amino Acids Into ProteinsCRF and CRF Receptors: Role in Stress Responsivity and Other BehaviorsCRF and CRF Receptors: Role in Stress Responsivity and Other BehaviorsDARPP-32: An Integrator of NeurotransmissionCRF and CRF Receptors: Role in Stress Responsivity and Other BehaviorsCRF and CRF Receptors: Role in Stress Responsivity and Other BehaviorsThe Role of Oxidative Stress in CarcinogenesisMuscarinic Acetylcholine Receptor Knockout Mice: Novel Phenotypes and Clinical Implicationsβ-Adrenergic Receptors and Regulation of Energy Expenditure: A Family AffairCRF and CRF Receptors: Role in Stress Responsivity and Other BehaviorsTHE BIOLOGY OF XYLEM FLUID–FEEDING INSECT VECTORS OF XYLELLA FASTIDIOSA AND THEIR RELATION TO DISEASE EPIDEMIOLOGYFUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY OF IMMATURE PARASITOIDSPHYLOGENY AND BIOLOGY OF NEOTROPICAL ORCHID BEES (EUGLOSSINI)PHYLOGENY AND BIOLOGY OF NEOTROPICAL ORCHID BEES (EUGLOSSINI)BENJAMIN DANN WALSH: Pioneer Entomologist and Proponent of Darwinian TheoryFUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY OF IMMATURE PARASITOIDSFUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY OF IMMATURE PARASITOIDSPHYLOGENY AND BIOLOGY OF NEOTROPICAL ORCHID BEES (EUGLOSSINI)FUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY OF IMMATURE PARASITOIDSVENEZUELAN EQUINE ENCEPHALITISPOPULATION GENETICS OF AUTOCIDAL CONTROL AND STRAIN REPLACEMENTVENEZUELAN EQUINE ENCEPHALITISPHYLOGENY AND BIOLOGY OF NEOTROPICAL ORCHID BEES (EUGLOSSINI)VENEZUELAN EQUINE ENCEPHALITISTHE BIOLOGY OF XYLEM FLUID–FEEDING INSECT VECTORS OF XYLELLA FASTIDIOSA AND THEIR RELATION TO DISEASE EPIDEMIOLOGYFUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY OF IMMATURE PARASITOIDSBENJAMIN DANN WALSH: Pioneer Entomologist and Proponent of Darwinian TheoryFUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY OF IMMATURE PARASITOIDSHUMAN LICE AND THEIR CONTROLDEFENSIVE BEHAVIOR OF HONEY BEES: Organization, Genetics, and Comparisons with Other BeesFUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY OF IMMATURE PARASITOIDSDEFENSIVE BEHAVIOR OF HONEY BEES: Organization, Genetics, and Comparisons with Other BeesVENEZUELAN EQUINE ENCEPHALITISFUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY OF IMMATURE PARASITOIDSPHYLOGENY AND BIOLOGY OF NEOTROPICAL ORCHID BEES (EUGLOSSINI)RecA-Dependent Recovery of Arrested DNA Replication ForksHeparan Sulfate Core Proteins in Cell-Cell SignalingUnusual Life Style of Giant Chlorella VirusesRecA-Dependent Recovery of Arrested DNA Replication ForksGenetics of Lactase Persistence and Lactose IntolerancePatterns and Mechanisms of the Forest Carbon CycleTHE ROLE OF CARBON CYCLE OBSERVATIONS AND KNOWLEDGE IN CARBON MANAGEMENTEvaluating Uncertainties in Regional Photochemical Air Quality ModelingTHE ROLE OF CARBON CYCLE OBSERVATIONS AND KNOWLEDGE IN CARBON MANAGEMENTState of the World’s FisheriesFemtosecond Time-Resolved Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Polyatomic MoleculesA Salvage Pathway for Protein Synthesis: tmRNA and Trans-TranslationFemtosecond Time-Resolved Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Polyatomic MoleculesPhotoelectron Angular DistributionsPhotoelectron Angular DistributionsMaster Equation Models for Chemical Reactions of Importance in CombustionOptical Properties and Ultrafast Dynamics of Metallic NanocrystalsMaster Equation Models for Chemical Reactions of Importance in CombustionBacterial Biofilms: An Emerging Link to Disease PathogenesisThe Secret Lives of the Pathogenic MycobacteriaAssembly Dynamics of the Bacterial Cell Division Protein FtsZ: Poised at the Edge of StabilityThe Secret Lives of the Pathogenic MycobacteriaAssembly Dynamics of the Bacterial Cell Division Protein FtsZ: Poised at the Edge of StabilityIn Search of Perfection: Understanding the Highly Defect-Selective Chemistry of Anisotropic EtchingFemtosecond Time-Resolved Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Polyatomic MoleculesFemtosecond Time-Resolved Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Polyatomic MoleculesMolecular Pathogenicity of the Oral Opportunistic Pathogen Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitansFemtosecond Time-Resolved Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Polyatomic MoleculesA Salvage Pathway for Protein Synthesis: tmRNA and Trans-TranslationTransposable Elements in Filamentous FungiAssembly Dynamics of the Bacterial Cell Division Protein FtsZ: Poised at the Edge of StabilityA Salvage Pathway for Protein Synthesis: tmRNA and Trans-TranslationNatural Selection and the Emergence of a Mutation Phenotype: An Update of the Evolutionary Synthesis Considering Mechanisms that Affect Genome VariationThe Secret Lives of the Pathogenic MycobacteriaA Salvage Pathway for Protein Synthesis: tmRNA and Trans-TranslationLong-Range Resonance Energy Transfer in Molecular SystemsThe Secret Lives of the Pathogenic MycobacteriaQuantum Scattering Calculations on Chemical ReactionsQuantum Scattering Calculations on Chemical ReactionsMeasles Virus 1998–2002: Progress and ControversyDNA Mismatch Repair: Molecular Mechanisms and Biological FunctionNatural Selection and the Emergence of a Mutation Phenotype: An Update of the Evolutionary Synthesis Considering Mechanisms that Affect Genome VariationDNA Mismatch Repair: Molecular Mechanisms and Biological FunctionDNA Mismatch Repair: Molecular Mechanisms and Biological FunctionA Salvage Pathway for Protein Synthesis: tmRNA and Trans-TranslationDEVELOPMENT OF ALTERNATIVE STRATEGIES FOR MANAGEMENT OF SOILBORNE PATHOGENS CURRENTLY CONTROLLED WITH METHYL BROMIDEPATHOGEN SELF-DEFENSE: Mechanisms to Counteract Microbial AntagonismTHE ECOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF BIOFILM FORMATION BY PLANT-ASSOCIATED BACTERIAPATHOGEN SELF-DEFENSE: Mechanisms to Counteract Microbial AntagonismPATHOGEN SELF-DEFENSE: Mechanisms to Counteract Microbial AntagonismTHE THREAT OF PLANT PATHOGENS AS WEAPONS AGAINST U.S. CROPSPATHOGEN SELF-DEFENSE: Mechanisms to Counteract Microbial AntagonismTHE ECOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF BIOFILM FORMATION BY PLANT-ASSOCIATED BACTERIAPATHOGEN SELF-DEFENSE: Mechanisms to Counteract Microbial AntagonismPATHOGEN SELF-DEFENSE: Mechanisms to Counteract Microbial AntagonismPATHOGEN SELF-DEFENSE: Mechanisms to Counteract Microbial AntagonismPATHOGEN SELF-DEFENSE: Mechanisms to Counteract Microbial AntagonismPATHOGEN SELF-DEFENSE: Mechanisms to Counteract Microbial AntagonismPATHOGEN SELF-DEFENSE: Mechanisms to Counteract Microbial AntagonismPATHOGEN SELF-DEFENSE: Mechanisms to Counteract Microbial AntagonismProton Conduction Mechanisms at Low Degrees of Hydration in Sulfonic Acid–Based Polymer Electrolyte MembranesMaterials Design for the Next Generation Thermal Barrier CoatingsMaterials Design for the Next Generation Thermal Barrier CoatingsRecent Advances in Materials for Fuel CellsNon-Fluorinated Polymer Materials for Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel CellsMaterials Design for the Next Generation Thermal Barrier CoatingsMaterials Design for the Next Generation Thermal Barrier CoatingsScience and Technology of the Twenty-First Century: Synthesis, Properties, and Applications of Carbon NanotubesMaterials Design for the Next Generation Thermal Barrier CoatingsScience and Technology of the Twenty-First Century: Synthesis, Properties, and Applications of Carbon NanotubesUnderstanding Materials CompatibilityIRON STATUS AND NEURAL FUNCTIONINGNUTRITION IN THE PERIOPERATIVE PATIENTDIET AND NUTRITION IN POOR AND MINORITY COMMUNITIES IN THE UNITED STATES 100 YEARS AGOTROPHIC AND CYTOPROTECTIVE NUTRITION FOR INTESTINAL ADAPTATION, MUCOSAL REPAIR, AND BARRIER FUNCTIONCHALLENGES AND APPROACHES TO REDUCING FOODBORNE ILLNESSCHALLENGES AND APPROACHES TO REDUCING FOODBORNE ILLNESSNUTRITION IN THE PERIOPERATIVE PATIENTOptical Single Transporter Recording: Transport Kinetics in Microarrays of Membrane PatchesMechanisms of Alternative Pre-Messenger RNA SplicingFunctional Genomics of P450SThe Structural Basis of Large Ribosomal Subunit FunctionThe Structural Basis of Large Ribosomal Subunit FunctionProtein Analysis by Hydrogen Exchange Mass SpectrometryMolecular Recognition and Docking AlgorithmsSemisynthesis of Proteins by Expressed Protein LigationSemisynthesis of Proteins by Expressed Protein LigationBiology of the p21-Activated KinasesDynamics of Cell Surface Molecules During T Cell RecognitionA Genetic Approach to Mammalian Glycan FunctionThe Dynamics of Chromosome Organization and Gene RegulationFunctional Genomics of P450SMechanisms of Alternative Pre-Messenger RNA SplicingBiology of the p21-Activated KinasesMechanisms of Alternative Pre-Messenger RNA SplicingMechanisms of Alternative Pre-Messenger RNA SplicingThe Plant Cell CycleThe Dynamics of Chromosome Organization and Gene RegulationOptical Single Transporter Recording: Transport Kinetics in Microarrays of Membrane PatchesBiology of the p21-Activated KinasesMetabolomics in Systems BiologyThe Structural Basis of Large Ribosomal Subunit FunctionOptical Single Transporter Recording: Transport Kinetics in Microarrays of Membrane PatchesThe Role of Dynamics in Enzyme ActivityThe Enzymes, Regulation, and Genetics of Bile Acid SynthesisOptical Single Transporter Recording: Transport Kinetics in Microarrays of Membrane PatchesFunctional Genomics of P450SFunctional Genomics of P450SDynamics of Cell Surface Molecules During T Cell RecognitionHow Do Cells Know What They Want to Be When They Grow Up? Lessons from Epidermal Patterning in ArabidopsisPhospholipid-Based Signaling in PlantsThe Many Faces of Vitamin B12: Catalysis by Cobalamin-Dependent EnzymesThe Structural Basis of Large Ribosomal Subunit FunctionFunctional Genomics of P450SFunction and Structure of Complex II of the Respiratory ChainX-Ray Crystallographic Analysis of Lipid-Protein Interactions in the Bacteriorhodopsin Purple MembraneMetabolomics in Systems BiologyFunctional Genomics of P450SNitric Oxide: The Versatility of an Extensive Signal MoleculeMetabolomics in Systems BiologyOptical Single Transporter Recording: Transport Kinetics in Microarrays of Membrane PatchesMolecular Recognition and Docking AlgorithmsOptical Single Transporter Recording: Transport Kinetics in Microarrays of Membrane PatchesMolecular Recognition and Docking AlgorithmsCations as Hydrogen Bond Donors: A View of Electrostatic Interactions in DNAPhospholipid-Based Signaling in PlantsFunctional Genomics of P450SDynamics of Cell Surface Molecules During T Cell RecognitionDynamics of Cell Surface Molecules During T Cell RecognitionDynamics of Cell Surface Molecules During T Cell RecognitionThe Structural Basis of Large Ribosomal Subunit FunctionT Cell AnergyPositive and Negative Selection of T CellsThe Role of Drug Transporters at the Blood-Brain BarrierPoxviruses and Immune EvasionThe Biology of IgE and the Basis of Allergic DiseaseThe Biology of IgE and the Basis of Allergic DiseaseThe Biology of IgE and the Basis of Allergic DiseaseThe Biology of IgE and the Basis of Allergic DiseaseThe Biology of IgE and the Basis of Allergic DiseaseAlzheimer's Disease: Molecular Understanding Predicts Amyloid-Based TherapeuticsInnate Immune Responses to Microbial Poisons: Discovery and Function of the Toll-Like ReceptorsRegulation of TRP Channels via Lipid Second MessengersPhysiology of Gastric Enterochromaffin-Like CellsApplication of Microarray Technology in Environmental and Comparative PhysiologyStructure and Mechanism of Na,K-ATPase: Functional Sites and Their InteractionsG Protein-Coupled Receptor Rhodopsin: A ProspectusOrigins and Consequences of Mitochondrial Variation in Vertebrate MuscleTerminal Differentiation of Intercalated Cells: The Role of HensinThe Gastric Biology of Helicobacter pyloriThe Role of Exogenous Surfactant in the Treatment of Acute Lung InjuryAIDS-Related MalignanciesFunctional Genomics of the Paraoxonase (PON1) Polymorphisms: Effects on Pesticide Sensitivity, Cardiovascular Disease, and Drug MetabolismThe Current Status of Hematopoietic Cell TransplantationPathogenesis and Treatment of Graft-Versus-Host Disease After Bone Marrow TransplantPathogenesis and Treatment of Graft-Versus-Host Disease After Bone Marrow TransplantPharmacogenetics in Cancer TreatmentErectile DysfunctionStudying Cancer Families to Identify Kidney Cancer GenesThe Challenge and Potential of Childhood Immunization RegistriesThe Challenge and Potential of Childhood Immunization RegistriesThe Challenge and Potential of Childhood Immunization RegistriesThe Challenge and Potential of Childhood Immunization RegistriesHealth Issues of Air TravelPublic Health, GIS, and the InternetHealth Issues of Air TravelPublic Health, GIS, and the InternetPublic Health, GIS, and the InternetPOPULATION-LEVEL EFFECTS OF PESTICIDES AND OTHER TOXICANTS ON ARTHROPODSSIGNALING PATHWAYS AND PHYSIOLOGICAL FUNCTIONS OF DROSOPHILA MELANOGASTER FMRFAMIDE-RELATED PEPTIDESPublic Health, GIS, and the InternetPublic Health, GIS, and the InternetGRASSES AND GALL MIDGES: Plant Defense and Insect AdaptationMethodologic Advances and Ongoing Challenges in Designing Community-Based Health Promotion ProgramsPOPULATION-LEVEL EFFECTS OF PESTICIDES AND OTHER TOXICANTS ON ARTHROPODSCommunication with Substrate-Borne Signals in Small Plant-Dwelling InsectsPublic Health, GIS, and the InternetCommunication with Substrate-Borne Signals in Small Plant-Dwelling InsectsFeather Mites (Acari: Astigmata): Ecology, Behavior, and EvolutionTHE EVOLUTION OF ALTERNATIVE GENETIC SYSTEMS IN INSECTSSIGNALING PATHWAYS AND PHYSIOLOGICAL FUNCTIONS OF DROSOPHILA MELANOGASTER FMRFAMIDE-RELATED PEPTIDESThe Feline Genome ProjectThe Feline Genome ProjectThe Feline Genome ProjectThe Feline Genome ProjectPHYSICS OPPORTUNITIES AT NEUTRINO FACTORIESGenetic Approaches to Molecular and Cellular Cognition: A Focus on LTP and Learning and MemoryPHYSICS OPPORTUNITIES AT NEUTRINO FACTORIESGenetics of Sensory MechanotransductionPHYSICS OPPORTUNITIES AT NEUTRINO FACTORIESRecombination in Evolutionary GenomicsGenetic Approaches to Molecular and Cellular Cognition: A Focus on LTP and Learning and MemoryEvolution of the Indian Nuclear Power ProgramAppliance and Equipment Efficiency StandardsCarbonate Chemistry for Sequestering Fossil CarbonCarbonate Chemistry for Sequestering Fossil CarbonCarbonate Chemistry for Sequestering Fossil CarbonThe Evolution of an Energy Analyst: Some Personal ReflectionsCarbonate Chemistry for Sequestering Fossil CarbonThe Evolution of an Energy Analyst: Some Personal ReflectionsSTUDIES OF POLYMER SURFACES BY SUM FREQUENCY GENERATION VIBRATIONAL SPECTROSCOPYMicrobial Degradation of PolyhydroxyalkanoatesSCATTERING RESONANCES IN THE SIMPLEST CHEMICAL REACTIONGenome Remodeling in Ciliated ProtozoaELECTRONIC STRUCTURE AND CATALYSIS ON METAL SURFACESSCATTERING RESONANCES IN THE SIMPLEST CHEMICAL REACTIONBiofilms as Complex Differentiated CommunitiesSTUDIES OF POLYMER SURFACES BY SUM FREQUENCY GENERATION VIBRATIONAL SPECTROSCOPYSCANNING TUNNELING MICROSCOPY STUDIES OF THE ONE-DIMENSIONAL ELECTRONIC PROPERTIES OF SINGLE-WALLED CARBON NANOTUBESMicrobial Degradation of PolyhydroxyalkanoatesWhat are Bacterial Species?Microbial Degradation of PolyhydroxyalkanoatesSURFACE FEMTOCHEMISTRY: Observation and Quantum Control of Frustrated Desorption of Alkali Atoms from Noble MetalsQUANTUM MECHANICAL METHODS FOR ENZYME KINETICSThe Class Mesomycetozoea: A Heterogeneous Group of Microorganisms at the Animal-Fungal BoundaryHeavy Metal Mining Using MicrobesMechanisms of Solvent Tolerance in Gram-Negative BacteriaELECTRONIC STRUCTURE AND CATALYSIS ON METAL SURFACESSCATTERING RESONANCES IN THE SIMPLEST CHEMICAL REACTIONPoliovirus Cell Entry: Common Structural Themes in Viral Cell Entry PathwaysBacterial Chromosome SegregationTransition Metal Transport in YeastCommon Principles in Viral EntryBacterial Chromosome SegregationBIOLOGICAL CONTROL OF POSTHARVEST DISEASES OF FRUITSGENETICS OF MYELOID LEUKEMIASLINKAGE ANALYSIS IN PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS: The Emerging PictureMOLECULAR BASIS OF RECOGNITION BETWEEN PHYTOPHTHORA PATHOGENS AND THEIR HOSTSMOLECULAR MECHANISMS FOR GENOMIC DISORDERSHedgehog Signaling and Human DiseasePATENTING GENES AND GENETIC RESEARCH TOOLS: Good or Bad for Innovation?GENETICS OF MYELOID LEUKEMIASHUMAN MIGRATIONS AND POPULATION STRUCTURE: What We Know and Why it MattersHedgehog Signaling and Human DiseaseThe Application of Tandem Mass Spectrometry to Neonatal Screening for Inherited Disorders of Intermediary MetabolismHedgehog Signaling and Human DiseaseHedgehog Signaling and Human DiseaseCOMPARATIVE GENOMIC ANALYSIS OF PLANT-ASSOCIATED BACTERIAExtending the Time Scale in Atomistic Simulation of MaterialsExtending the Time Scale in Atomistic Simulation of MaterialsExtending the Time Scale in Atomistic Simulation of MaterialsExtending the Time Scale in Atomistic Simulation of MaterialsDNA Microarray Technology: Devices, Systems, and ApplicationsMolecular and Mesoscale Simulation Methods for Polymer MaterialsMicromechanics Simulations of FracturePhase-Field Models for Microstructure EvolutionExtending the Time Scale in Atomistic Simulation of MaterialsExtending the Time Scale in Atomistic Simulation of MaterialsREGULATION OF ENZYMES OF THE UREA CYCLE AND ARGININE METABOLISMFATTY ACID TRANSPORT ACROSS MEMBRANES: Relevance to Nutrition and Metabolic PathologyNUTRITIONAL IMPACT OF INTESTINAL HELMINTHIASIS DURING THE HUMAN LIFE CYCLECAROTENOID BIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSIONREGULATION OF ENZYMES OF THE UREA CYCLE AND ARGININE METABOLISMDIETARY CONJUGATED LINOLEIC ACID IN HEALTH: Physiological Effects and Mechanisms of ActionBODY COMPOSITION OF THE MALE AND FEMALE REFERENCE INFANTSDIETARY CONJUGATED LINOLEIC ACID IN HEALTH: Physiological Effects and Mechanisms of ActionFATTY ACID TRANSPORT ACROSS MEMBRANES: Relevance to Nutrition and Metabolic PathologyDIETARY CONJUGATED LINOLEIC ACID IN HEALTH: Physiological Effects and Mechanisms of ActionCAROTENOID BIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSIONDIETARY CONJUGATED LINOLEIC ACID IN HEALTH: Physiological Effects and Mechanisms of ActionIN VIVO KINETICS OF FOLATE METABOLISMHYDROXYLASE ENZYMES OF THE VITAMIN D PATHWAY: Expression, Function, and RegulationA NEW MOSS GENETICS: Targeted Mutagenesis in Physcomitrella patensDNA Replication in Eukaryotic CellsPrinciples and Biophysical Applications of Lanthanide-Based ProbesDNA Replication in Eukaryotic CellsPHYTOCHROMES CONTROL PHOTOMORPHOGENESIS BY DIFFERENTIALLY REGULATED, INTERACTING SIGNALING PATHWAYS IN HIGHER PLANTSTHE COMPLEX FATE OF α-KETOACIDSTHE LIPOXYGENASE PATHWAYComputational Cell Biology: Spatiotemporal Simulation of Cellular EventsThe Linkage Between Protein Folding and Functional Cooperativity: Two Sides of the Same Coin?Magnetic Resonance Studies of the Bacteriorhodopsin Pump CycleCatalytic Proficiency: The Unusual Case of OMP DecarboxylaseCatalytic Proficiency: The Unusual Case of OMP DecarboxylaseMagnetic Resonance Studies of the Bacteriorhodopsin Pump CycleCOMPLEX EVOLUTION OF PHOTOSYNTHESISActive Site Tightness and Substrate Fit in DNA ReplicationPHYTOCHROMES CONTROL PHOTOMORPHOGENESIS BY DIFFERENTIALLY REGULATED, INTERACTING SIGNALING PATHWAYS IN HIGHER PLANTSParamagnetic Resonance of Biological Metal CentersNONSELECTIVE CATION CHANNELS IN PLANTSNeuronal Ca2+/Calmodulin-Dependent Protein Kinase II: The Role of Structure and Autoregulation in Cellular FunctionCatalytic Proficiency: The Unusual Case of OMP DecarboxylaseCatalytic Proficiency: The Unusual Case of OMP DecarboxylaseNONSELECTIVE CATION CHANNELS IN PLANTSSingle-Particle Imaging of Macromolecules by Cryo-Electron MicroscopyRNA Editing by Adenosine Deaminases That Act on RNAHomogeneous Glycopeptides and Glycoproteins for Biological InvestigationMetabolism and the Control of Circadian RhythmsRhodopsin: Insights from Recent Structural StudiesMechanisms of Fast Protein FoldingParamagnetic Resonance of Biological Metal CentersFlow Cytometric Analysis of Ligand-Receptor Interactions and Molecular AssembliesABSCISSION, DEHISCENCE, AND OTHER CELL SEPARATION PROCESSESV(D)J Recombination: RAG Proteins, Repair Factors, and RegulationNONSELECTIVE CATION CHANNELS IN PLANTSMy Road to Biophysics: Picking Flowers on the Way to PhotosynthesisSHOOT AND FLORAL MERISTEM MAINTENANCE IN ARABIDOPSISRNA Editing by Adenosine Deaminases That Act on RNACHLORORESPIRATIONCatalytic Proficiency: The Unusual Case of OMP DecarboxylaseThe Bacterial RecA Protein and the Recombinational DNA Repair of Stalled Replication ForksCatalytic Proficiency: The Unusual Case of OMP DecarboxylaseSingle-Particle Imaging of Macromolecules by Cryo-Electron MicroscopyCHLORORESPIRATIONMagnetic Resonance Studies of the Bacteriorhodopsin Pump CycleTuberculosisSocioeconomic Status and Health: The Potential Role of Environmental Risk ExposureGambling and Related Mental Disorders: A Public Health AnalysisThe Public Health Impact of Alzheimer's Disease, 2000–2050: Potential Implication of Treatment AdvancesChallenges in Motor Vehicle SafetyOrigins and Functions of B-1 Cells with Notes on the Role of CD5Origins and Functions of B-1 Cells with Notes on the Role of CD5Neuroendocrine Regulation of ImmunityRegulation of CYP3A Gene Transcription by the Pregnane X ReceptorShort-Term Synaptic PlasticityG Proteins and Phototransductionβ-Defensins in Lung Host DefenseOvulation: New Dimensions and New Regulators of the Inflammatory-Like ResponseMechanisms of Iron Accumulation in Hereditary HemochromatosisG Proteins and Pheromone SignalingOvulation: New Dimensions and New Regulators of the Inflammatory-Like ResponseOvulation: New Dimensions and New Regulators of the Inflammatory-Like ResponseShort-Term Synaptic PlasticityAttention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder Across the LifespanImmune Reconstitution in Patients with HIV InfectionBiology and Management of Economically Important Lepidopteran Cereal Stem Borers in AfricaAlternatives to Methyl Bromide Treatments for Stored-Product and Quarantine InsectsAlternatives to Methyl Bromide Treatments for Stored-Product and Quarantine InsectsAlternatives to Methyl Bromide Treatments for Stored-Product and Quarantine InsectsAlternatives to Methyl Bromide Treatments for Stored-Product and Quarantine InsectsEconomic, Ecological, Food Safety, and Social Consequences of the Deployment of Bt Transgenic PlantsEcology and Behavior of First Instar Larval LepidopteraCan Generalist Predators be Effective Biocontrol Agents?Can Generalist Predators be Effective Biocontrol Agents?Invasions by Insect Vectors of Human DiseaseEconomic, Ecological, Food Safety, and Social Consequences of the Deployment of Bt Transgenic PlantsAlternatives to Methyl Bromide Treatments for Stored-Product and Quarantine InsectsAlternatives to Methyl Bromide Treatments for Stored-Product and Quarantine InsectsEconomic, Ecological, Food Safety, and Social Consequences of the Deployment of Bt Transgenic PlantsBiology and Management of Economically Important Lepidopteran Cereal Stem Borers in AfricaOmnivory in Terrestrial Arthropods: Mixing Plant and Prey DietsEcology and Behavior of First Instar Larval LepidopteraDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisRecombinational DNA Repair of Damaged Replication Forks in Escherichia coli: QuestionsTranslational Regulation and RNA Localization in Drosophila Oocytes and EmbryosDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisGenetic Analysis of Calmodulin and Its Targets in Saccharomyces cerevisiaeDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisAnimal Models of Tumor-Suppressor GenesDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisIdentification of Epilepsy Genes in Human and MouseHIGHLIGHTS OF THE SLD PHYSICS PROGRAM AT THE SLAC LINEAR COLLIDERDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisFEDERAL FOSSIL FUEL SUBSIDIES AND GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS: A Case Study of Increasing Transparency for Fiscal PolicyENERGY CONSERVATION IN CHINESE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS: Progress and Opportunities in Design and PolicyFEDERAL FOSSIL FUEL SUBSIDIES AND GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS: A Case Study of Increasing Transparency for Fiscal PolicyGLOBAL ELECTRIC POWER REFORM, PRIVATIZATION, AND LIBERALIZATION OF THE ELECTRIC POWER INDUSTRY IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIESENERGY CONSERVATION IN CHINESE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS: Progress and Opportunities in Design and PolicyENERGY CONSERVATION IN CHINESE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS: Progress and Opportunities in Design and PolicyCARBON SINKS IN TEMPERATE FORESTSFEDERAL FOSSIL FUEL SUBSIDIES AND GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS: A Case Study of Increasing Transparency for Fiscal PolicyCARBON SINKS IN TEMPERATE FORESTSENERGY CONSERVATION IN CHINESE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS: Progress and Opportunities in Design and PolicyFEDERAL FOSSIL FUEL SUBSIDIES AND GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS: A Case Study of Increasing Transparency for Fiscal PolicyINDICATORS OF ENERGY USE AND CARBON EMISSIONS: Explaining the Energy Economy LinkInteraction of Bacterial Pathogens with Polarized EpitheliumPULSED EPR SPECTROSCOPY: Biological ApplicationsInteraction of Bacterial Pathogens with Polarized EpitheliumAntigenic Variation at the Infected Red Cell Surface in MalariaEARLY EVENTS IN RNA FOLDINGRATIOMETRIC SINGLE-MOLECULE STUDIES OF FREELY DIFFUSING BIOMOLECULESFAST PROTEIN DYNAMICS PROBED WITH INFRARED VIBRATIONAL ECHO EXPERIMENTSREACTIONS AND THERMOCHEMISTRY OF SMALL TRANSITION METAL CLUSTER IONSPOLYMER ADSORPTION–DRIVEN SELF-ASSEMBLY OF NANOSTRUCTURESRATIOMETRIC SINGLE-MOLECULE STUDIES OF FREELY DIFFUSING BIOMOLECULESImmune Checkpoints in Viral LatencyNovel Thiols of ProkaryotesLIGHT-EMITTING ELECTROCHEMICAL PROCESSESPOLYMER ADSORPTION–DRIVEN SELF-ASSEMBLY OF NANOSTRUCTURESAntigenic Variation at the Infected Red Cell Surface in MalariaHomology-Dependent Gene Silencing Mechanisms in FungiREACTIONS AND THERMOCHEMISTRY OF SMALL TRANSITION METAL CLUSTER IONSBacteriophage TherapyTIME-RESOLVED PHOTOELECTRON SPECTROSCOPY OF MOLECULES AND CLUSTERSNovel Thiols of ProkaryotesREACTIONS AND THERMOCHEMISTRY OF SMALL TRANSITION METAL CLUSTER IONSBIOMOLECULAR SOLID STATE NMR: Advances in Structural Methodology and Applications to Peptide and Protein FibrilsBIOMOLECULAR SOLID STATE NMR: Advances in Structural Methodology and Applications to Peptide and Protein FibrilsCROSSED-BEAM STUDIES OF NEUTRAL REACTIONS: State-Specific Differential Cross SectionsHomology-Dependent Gene Silencing Mechanisms in FungiPOLYMER ADSORPTION–DRIVEN SELF-ASSEMBLY OF NANOSTRUCTURESHomology-Dependent Gene Silencing Mechanisms in FungiHomology-Dependent Gene Silencing Mechanisms in FungiBacterial Gliding Motility: Multiple Mechanisms for Cell Movement over SurfacesREACTIONS AND THERMOCHEMISTRY OF SMALL TRANSITION METAL CLUSTER IONSPOLYMER ADSORPTION–DRIVEN SELF-ASSEMBLY OF NANOSTRUCTURESA NEW APPROACH TO DECODING LIFE: Systems BiologyUSHER SYNDROME: From Genetics to PathogenesisTHE ROLE OF POLYGALACTURONASE-INHIBITING PROTEINS (PGIPS) IN DEFENSE AGAINST PATHOGENIC FUNGIUSHER SYNDROME: From Genetics to PathogenesisMOLECULAR DETERMINANTS OF RHIZOSPHERE COLONIZATION BY PSEUDOMONASCongenital Disorders of GlycosylationThe Genomics and Genetics of Human Infectious Disease SusceptibilityUSHER SYNDROME: From Genetics to PathogenesisPrivacy and Confidentiality of Genetic Information: What Rules for the New Science?Privacy and Confidentiality of Genetic Information: What Rules for the New Science?Privacy and Confidentiality of Genetic Information: What Rules for the New Science?Privacy and Confidentiality of Genetic Information: What Rules for the New Science?New DNA Sequencing MethodsMicro- and Nanomechanics of the Cochlear Outer Hair CellSoft Lithography in Biology and BiochemistryDesign and Synthesis of Energetic MaterialsSoft Lithography in Biology and BiochemistryNew DNA Sequencing MethodsMechanisms Involved in Osteoblast Response to Implant Surface MorphologySoft Lithography in Biology and BiochemistryComputer Modeling and Simulation of Human MovementMechanisms Involved in Osteoblast Response to Implant Surface MorphologyRespiratory Fluid Mechanics and Transport ProcessesSoft Lithography in Biology and BiochemistryNew DNA Sequencing MethodsThe “Fetal Origins” Hypothesis: Challenges and Opportunities for Maternal and Child NutritionNUTRITIONAL MANAGEMENT OF MAINTENANCE DIALYSIS PATIENTS: Why Aren't We Doing Better?PERSPECTIVES ON NUTRITIONAL IRON DEFICIENCYVITAMIN A, INFECTION, AND IMMUNE FUNCTION*The “Fetal Origins” Hypothesis: Challenges and Opportunities for Maternal and Child NutritionProtein Folding Theory: From Lattice to All-Atom ModelsProtein Folding Theory: From Lattice to All-Atom ModelsCYTOKINESIS AND BUILDING OF THE CELL PLATE IN PLANTSPLANT MITOCHONDRIA AND OXIDATIVE STRESS: Electron Transport, NADPH Turnover, and Metabolism of Reactive Oxygen SpeciesAb Initio Protein Structure Prediction: Progress and ProspectsChanneling of Substrates and Intermediates in Enzyme-Catalyzed ReactionsENDOSPERM DEVELOPMENT: Cellularization and Cell Fate SpecificationPhotosystem II: The Solid Structural EraHistone AcetyltransferasesENDOSPERM DEVELOPMENT: Cellularization and Cell Fate SpecificationChanneling of Substrates and Intermediates in Enzyme-Catalyzed ReactionsMACRONUTRIENT UTILIZATION BY PHOTOSYNTHETIC EUKARYOTES AND THE FABRIC OF INTERACTIONSDivergent Evolution of Enzymatic Function: Mechanistically Diverse Superfamilies and Functionally Distinct SuprafamiliesMACRONUTRIENT UTILIZATION BY PHOTOSYNTHETIC EUKARYOTES AND THE FABRIC OF INTERACTIONSMACRONUTRIENT UTILIZATION BY PHOTOSYNTHETIC EUKARYOTES AND THE FABRIC OF INTERACTIONSCYTOKINESIS AND BUILDING OF THE CELL PLATE IN PLANTSVARIATIONS IN THE BIOSYNTHESIS OF SEED-STORAGE LIPIDSDEFENSIVE RESIN BIOSYNTHESIS IN CONIFERSPhotosystem II: The Solid Structural EraVARIATIONS IN THE BIOSYNTHESIS OF SEED-STORAGE LIPIDSRegulation of Phosphoinositide-Specific Phospholipase CProtein Folding Theory: From Lattice to All-Atom ModelsMACRONUTRIENT UTILIZATION BY PHOTOSYNTHETIC EUKARYOTES AND THE FABRIC OF INTERACTIONSMACRONUTRIENT UTILIZATION BY PHOTOSYNTHETIC EUKARYOTES AND THE FABRIC OF INTERACTIONSGUARD CELL SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONBiomolecular Simulations: Recent Developments in Force Fields, Simulations of Enzyme Catalysis, Protein-Ligand, Protein-Protein, and Protein-Nucleic Acid Noncovalent InteractionsDivergent Evolution of Enzymatic Function: Mechanistically Diverse Superfamilies and Functionally Distinct SuprafamiliesCYTOKINESIS AND BUILDING OF THE CELL PLATE IN PLANTSProtein Folding Theory: From Lattice to All-Atom ModelsPhotosystem II: The Solid Structural EraRegulation of G Protein–Initiated Signal Transduction in Yeast: Paradigms and PrinciplesMACRONUTRIENT UTILIZATION BY PHOTOSYNTHETIC EUKARYOTES AND THE FABRIC OF INTERACTIONSDivergent Evolution of Enzymatic Function: Mechanistically Diverse Superfamilies and Functionally Distinct SuprafamiliesCYTOKINESIS AND BUILDING OF THE CELL PLATE IN PLANTSMACRONUTRIENT UTILIZATION BY PHOTOSYNTHETIC EUKARYOTES AND THE FABRIC OF INTERACTIONSMACRONUTRIENT UTILIZATION BY PHOTOSYNTHETIC EUKARYOTES AND THE FABRIC OF INTERACTIONSENDOSPERM DEVELOPMENT: Cellularization and Cell Fate SpecificationMACRONUTRIENT UTILIZATION BY PHOTOSYNTHETIC EUKARYOTES AND THE FABRIC OF INTERACTIONSCYTOKINESIS AND BUILDING OF THE CELL PLATE IN PLANTSMACRONUTRIENT UTILIZATION BY PHOTOSYNTHETIC EUKARYOTES AND THE FABRIC OF INTERACTIONSMACRONUTRIENT UTILIZATION BY PHOTOSYNTHETIC EUKARYOTES AND THE FABRIC OF INTERACTIONSMACRONUTRIENT UTILIZATION BY PHOTOSYNTHETIC EUKARYOTES AND THE FABRIC OF INTERACTIONSCIRCADIAN RHYTHMS IN PLANTSENDOSPERM DEVELOPMENT: Cellularization and Cell Fate SpecificationVARIATIONS IN THE BIOSYNTHESIS OF SEED-STORAGE LIPIDSFUNCTION AND MECHANISM OF ORGANIC ANION EXUDATION FROM PLANT ROOTSCIRCADIAN RHYTHMS IN PLANTSCYTOKINESIS AND BUILDING OF THE CELL PLATE IN PLANTSTHE COHESION-TENSION MECHANISM AND THE ACQUISITION OF WATER BY PLANT ROOTSPhotosystem II: The Solid Structural EraMACRONUTRIENT UTILIZATION BY PHOTOSYNTHETIC EUKARYOTES AND THE FABRIC OF INTERACTIONSBiomolecular Simulations: Recent Developments in Force Fields, Simulations of Enzyme Catalysis, Protein-Ligand, Protein-Protein, and Protein-Nucleic Acid Noncovalent InteractionsPhotosystem II: The Solid Structural EraPhotosystem II: The Solid Structural EraChanneling of Substrates and Intermediates in Enzyme-Catalyzed ReactionsPhotosystem II: The Solid Structural EraGUARD CELL SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONCYTOKINESIS AND BUILDING OF THE CELL PLATE IN PLANTSConsumer Reports in Health Care: Do They Make a Difference?The Case for a Medicare Drug Coverage Benefit: A Critical Review of the Empirical EvidenceThe Public Health Impact of ObesityInnovations in Treatment for Drug Abuse: Solutions to a Public Health ProblemThe Burden of Illness of Cancer: Economic Cost and Quality of LifeAdministrative Data for Public Health Surveillance and PlanningPreventing Obesity in Children and AdolescentsManaged Care: A View from EuropeThe Burden of Illness of Cancer: Economic Cost and Quality of LifeInnovations in Treatment for Drug Abuse: Solutions to a Public Health ProblemManaged Care: A View from EuropeConsumer Reports in Health Care: Do They Make a Difference?Managed Care: A View from EuropeAdministrative Data for Public Health Surveillance and PlanningInteractions Between Monoamines, Glutamate, and GABA in Schizophrenia: New EvidenceProstanoid Receptors: Subtypes and SignalingCross-Presentation, Dendritic Cells, Tolerance and ImmunityRole of Estrogen Receptor Beta in Estrogen Action13C NMR of Intermediary Metabolism: Implications for Systemic PhysiologyAntifreeze and Ice Nucleator Proteins in Terrestrial ArthropodsAntifreeze and Ice Nucleator Proteins in Terrestrial ArthropodsAntifreeze and Ice Nucleator Proteins in Terrestrial ArthropodsPathophysiological Role of Cytokines in Congestive Heart FailureAdvances in the Treatment of Lupus NephritisBiomedical Ethics and the Withdrawal of Advanced Life SupportBiomedical Ethics and the Withdrawal of Advanced Life SupportNovel Platelet InhibitorsBiomedical Ethics and the Withdrawal of Advanced Life SupportCurrent Treatment Strategies for Chronic Hepatitis B and CBiomedical Ethics and the Withdrawal of Advanced Life SupportBiomedical Ethics and the Withdrawal of Advanced Life SupportRisk-Adjusted Surgical OutcomesHereditary Distal Renal Tubular Acidosis: New UnderstandingsMATING BEHAVIOR AND CHEMICAL COMMUNICATION IN THE ORDER HYMENOPTERAMATING BEHAVIOR AND CHEMICAL COMMUNICATION IN THE ORDER HYMENOPTERAGenetic Transformation Systems in InsectsCOLONY DISPERSAL AND THE EVOLUTION OF QUEEN MORPHOLOGY IN SOCIAL HYMENOPTERAGenetic Transformation Systems in InsectsBIOGEOGRAPHY AND COMMUNITY STRUCTURE OF NORTH AMERICAN SEED-HARVESTER ANTSBIOLOGICAL CONTROL OF LOCUSTS AND GRASSHOPPERSFOOD WEBS IN PHYTOTELMATA: “Bottom-Up” and “Top-Down” Explanations for Community StructureGenetic Transformation Systems in InsectsTESTS OF REPRODUCTIVE-SKEW MODELS IN SOCIAL INSECTSFOOD WEBS IN PHYTOTELMATA: “Bottom-Up” and “Top-Down” Explanations for Community StructureBIOGEOGRAPHY AND COMMUNITY STRUCTURE OF NORTH AMERICAN SEED-HARVESTER ANTSCOLONY DISPERSAL AND THE EVOLUTION OF QUEEN MORPHOLOGY IN SOCIAL HYMENOPTERACOLONY DISPERSAL AND THE EVOLUTION OF QUEEN MORPHOLOGY IN SOCIAL HYMENOPTERABIOLOGICAL CONTROL OF LOCUSTS AND GRASSHOPPERSGenetic Transformation Systems in InsectsCOLONY DISPERSAL AND THE EVOLUTION OF QUEEN MORPHOLOGY IN SOCIAL HYMENOPTERAGenetic Transformation Systems in InsectsGenetic Transformation Systems in InsectsCOLONY DISPERSAL AND THE EVOLUTION OF QUEEN MORPHOLOGY IN SOCIAL HYMENOPTERABIOLOGICAL CONTROL OF LOCUSTS AND GRASSHOPPERSINSECT BIODEMOGRAPHYCOURTSHIP IN DROSOPHILACOMPLEX TRAIT ANALYSIS IN THE MOUSE: The Strengths, The Limitations and The Promise Yet To ComeDNA MISMATCH REPAIR AND GENETIC INSTABILITYCOURTSHIP IN DROSOPHILACOURTSHIP IN DROSOPHILATHE SOS RESPONSE: Recent Insights into umuDC-Dependent Mutagenesis and DNA Damage ToleranceASSESSMENT OF BACTERIAL PATHOGENESIS BY ANALYSIS OF GENE EXPRESSION IN THE HOSTCOURTSHIP IN DROSOPHILAHigh-Energy Neutrino AstrophysicsCOURTSHIP IN DROSOPHILACOURTSHIP IN DROSOPHILAPOLYGENIC AND MULTIFACTORIAL DISEASE GENE ASSOCIATION IN MAN: Lessons from AIDSCOURTSHIP IN DROSOPHILAASSESSMENT OF BACTERIAL PATHOGENESIS BY ANALYSIS OF GENE EXPRESSION IN THE HOSTDNA MISMATCH REPAIR AND GENETIC INSTABILITYDevelopments in Rare Kaon Decay PhysicsGENETIC ANALYSIS OF BACTERIOPHAGE-ENCODED COCHAPERONINSHigh-Energy Neutrino AstrophysicsOPPORTUNITIES FOR POLLUTION PREVENTION AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY ENABLED BY THE CARBON DIOXIDE TECHNOLOGY PLATFORMENGINEERING-ECONOMIC ANALYSES OF AUTOMOTIVE FUEL ECONOMY POTENTIAL IN THE UNITED STATESOPPORTUNITIES FOR POLLUTION PREVENTION AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY ENABLED BY THE CARBON DIOXIDE TECHNOLOGY PLATFORMINDUSTRIAL SYMBIOSIS: Literature and TaxonomyOrigins, Evolution, and Diversification of ZooplanktonINDUSTRIAL SYMBIOSIS: Literature and TaxonomyThe Ecology of Tropical Asian Rivers and Streams in Relation to Biodiversity ConservationAfrican Cichlid Fishes: Model Systems for Evolutionary BiologyThe Grasses: A Case Study in MacroevolutionOPPORTUNITIES FOR POLLUTION PREVENTION AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY ENABLED BY THE CARBON DIOXIDE TECHNOLOGY PLATFORMThe Ecology of Tropical Asian Rivers and Streams in Relation to Biodiversity ConservationOPPORTUNITIES FOR POLLUTION PREVENTION AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY ENABLED BY THE CARBON DIOXIDE TECHNOLOGY PLATFORMThe Ecology of Tropical Asian Rivers and Streams in Relation to Biodiversity ConservationENGINEERING-ECONOMIC ANALYSES OF AUTOMOTIVE FUEL ECONOMY POTENTIAL IN THE UNITED STATESOPPORTUNITIES FOR POLLUTION PREVENTION AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY ENABLED BY THE CARBON DIOXIDE TECHNOLOGY PLATFORMENGINEERING-ECONOMIC ANALYSES OF AUTOMOTIVE FUEL ECONOMY POTENTIAL IN THE UNITED STATESENGINEERING-ECONOMIC ANALYSES OF AUTOMOTIVE FUEL ECONOMY POTENTIAL IN THE UNITED STATESOPPORTUNITIES FOR POLLUTION PREVENTION AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY ENABLED BY THE CARBON DIOXIDE TECHNOLOGY PLATFORMThe Ecology of Tropical Asian Rivers and Streams in Relation to Biodiversity ConservationOPPORTUNITIES FOR POLLUTION PREVENTION AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY ENABLED BY THE CARBON DIOXIDE TECHNOLOGY PLATFORMOrigins, Evolution, and Diversification of ZooplanktonTECHNOLOGIES SUPPORTIVE OF SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORTATIONINDUSTRIAL SYMBIOSIS: Literature and TaxonomyOPPORTUNITIES FOR POLLUTION PREVENTION AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY ENABLED BY THE CARBON DIOXIDE TECHNOLOGY PLATFORMINDUSTRIAL SYMBIOSIS: Literature and TaxonomyOrigins, Evolution, and Diversification of ZooplanktonThe Ecology of Tropical Asian Rivers and Streams in Relation to Biodiversity ConservationTHE POTENTIAL OF BIOMASS FUELS IN THE CONTEXT OF GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE: Focus on Transportation FuelsOPPORTUNITIES FOR POLLUTION PREVENTION AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY ENABLED BY THE CARBON DIOXIDE TECHNOLOGY PLATFORMOPPORTUNITIES FOR POLLUTION PREVENTION AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY ENABLED BY THE CARBON DIOXIDE TECHNOLOGY PLATFORMThe Evolutionary Ecology of Tolerance to Consumer DamageCAPACITY DEVELOPMENT FOR THE ENVIRONMENT: A View for the South, A View for the NorthOPPORTUNITIES FOR POLLUTION PREVENTION AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY ENABLED BY THE CARBON DIOXIDE TECHNOLOGY PLATFORMBiofilm Formation as Microbial DevelopmentOxygen Respiration by Desulfovibrio SpeciesOxygen Respiration by Desulfovibrio SpeciesThe Dynamics of Noble Gas—Halogen Molecules and ClustersThe Dynamics of Noble Gas—Halogen Molecules and ClustersOxygen Respiration by Desulfovibrio SpeciesNucleic Acid Transport in Plant-Microbe Interactions: The Molecules That Walk Through the WallsLegionella Pneumophila Pathogenesis: A Fateful Journey from Amoebae to MacrophagesPathogenicity Islands and the Evolution of MicrobesLegionella Pneumophila Pathogenesis: A Fateful Journey from Amoebae to MacrophagesThe Dynamics of Noble Gas—Halogen Molecules and ClustersRegulation of Carbon Catabolism in Bacillus SpeciesThe Dynamics of Noble Gas—Halogen Molecules and ClustersThe Dynamics of Noble Gas—Halogen Molecules and ClustersThe Development of Genetic Tools for Dissecting the Biology of Malaria ParasitesTheoretical Studies of Atomic-Scale Processes Relevant to Crystal GrowthPhytoplasma: Phytopathogenic MollicutesBiofilm Formation as Microbial DevelopmentThe Dynamics of Noble Gas—Halogen Molecules and ClustersLegionella Pneumophila Pathogenesis: A Fateful Journey from Amoebae to MacrophagesThe Dynamics of Noble Gas—Halogen Molecules and ClustersRegulation of Carbon Catabolism in Bacillus SpeciesQuantitative Atom-Atom Potentials from Rotational Tunneling: Their Extraction and Their UseRegulation of Carbon Catabolism in Bacillus SpeciesThe Dynamics of Noble Gas—Halogen Molecules and ClustersThe Dynamics of Noble Gas—Halogen Molecules and ClustersBiofilm Formation as Microbial DevelopmentBiofilm Formation as Microbial DevelopmentSemiclassical Calculation of Chemical Reaction Dynamics via Wavepacket Correlation FunctionsThe Dynamics of Noble Gas—Halogen Molecules and ClustersControl of Virulence and Pathogenicity Genes of Ralstonia Solanacearum by an Elaborate Sensory NetworkIron Metabolism: Iron Deficiency and Iron OverloadBioinformatics Tools for Whole GenomesHow Many Genes Can Make a Cell: The Minimal-Gene-Set ConceptA Century of Plant Pathology: A Retrospective View on Understanding Host-Parasite InteractionsDNA Helicases, Genomic Instability, and Human Genetic DiseaseDNA Helicases, Genomic Instability, and Human Genetic DiseaseHow Many Genes Can Make a Cell: The Minimal-Gene-Set ConceptA Century of Plant Pathology: A Retrospective View on Understanding Host-Parasite InteractionsControl of Virulence and Pathogenicity Genes of Ralstonia Solanacearum by an Elaborate Sensory NetworkBioinformatics Tools for Whole GenomesHow Many Genes Can Make a Cell: The Minimal-Gene-Set ConceptBioinformatics Tools for Whole GenomesBioinformatics Tools for Whole GenomesPublic Concern About GeneticsAntibody EngineeringDevice Innovation and Material Challenges at the Limits of CMOS TechnologyMicrofabricated Microneedles for Gene and Drug DeliveryCell Mechanics: Mechanical Response, Cell Adhesion, and Molecular DeformationThree-Dimensional Ultrasound ImagingIC-Compatible Polysilicon Surface MicromachiningWavelets in Temporal and Spatial Processing of Biomedical ImagesAntibody EngineeringIC-Compatible Polysilicon Surface MicromachiningAntibody EngineeringIn Vivo Near-Infrared SpectroscopyWavelets in Temporal and Spatial Processing of Biomedical ImagesAntibody EngineeringMicroengineering of Cellular InteractionsAntibody EngineeringElectrophysiological Modeling of Cardiac Ventricular Function: From Cell to OrganWavelets in Temporal and Spatial Processing of Biomedical ImagesPROTEIN AND AMINO ACID METABOLISM DURING AND AFTER EXERCISE AND THE EFFECTS OF NUTRITIONLeptin—Much More Than a Satiety SignalTHE HEALTH BENEFITS OF WINEDietary Fat and Breast CancerPROTEIN AND AMINO ACID METABOLISM DURING AND AFTER EXERCISE AND THE EFFECTS OF NUTRITIONRegulation of Metabolism and Body Fat Mass by LeptinPROTEIN AND AMINO ACID METABOLISM DURING AND AFTER EXERCISE AND THE EFFECTS OF NUTRITIONIntestinal Transport During Fasting and MalnutritionBiosynthesis of Vitamin B2 (Riboflavin)From Chick Nutrition to Nutrition PolicyAlcohol: Its Metabolism and Interaction With NutrientsYeast Homotypic Vacuole Fusion: A Window on Organelle Trafficking MechanismsTwo-Component Signal TransductionPLANT THIOREDOXIN SYSTEMS REVISITEDRegulation of Chromosome ReplicationRegulation of Chromosome ReplicationStructure and Function of Cytochrome bc ComplexesRegulation of Chromosome ReplicationGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsCyclooxygenases: Structural, Cellular, and Molecular BiologyAutophagy, Cytoplasm-to-Vacuole Targeting Pathway, and Pexophagy in Yeast and Mammalian CellsGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsDEVELOPMENT OF SYMMETRY IN PLANTSHelical Membrane Protein Folding, Stability, and EvolutionHelical Membrane Protein Folding, Stability, and EvolutionMechanisms And Control Of mRNA Decapping in Saccharomyces cerevisiaeAutophagy, Cytoplasm-to-Vacuole Targeting Pathway, and Pexophagy in Yeast and Mammalian CellsSpindle Assembly in Animal CellsCyclooxygenases: Structural, Cellular, and Molecular BiologyCyclooxygenases: Structural, Cellular, and Molecular BiologyCyclooxygenases: Structural, Cellular, and Molecular BiologyHelical Membrane Protein Folding, Stability, and EvolutionCyclooxygenases: Structural, Cellular, and Molecular BiologyGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsDEVELOPMENT OF SYMMETRY IN PLANTSAutophagy, Cytoplasm-to-Vacuole Targeting Pathway, and Pexophagy in Yeast and Mammalian CellsGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsMechanisms And Control Of mRNA Decapping in Saccharomyces cerevisiaeMechanisms And Control Of mRNA Decapping in Saccharomyces cerevisiaeMechanisms And Control Of mRNA Decapping in Saccharomyces cerevisiaeAminoacyl-tRNA SynthesisCoupling of Open Reading Frames by Translational BypassingCYTOSKELETAL PERSPECTIVES ON ROOT GROWTH AND MORPHOGENESISGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsSpindle Assembly in Animal CellsOral Health in the United States: The Post-Fluoride GenerationThe Interface of Genetics and Public Health: Research and Educational ChallengesThe Interface of Genetics and Public Health: Research and Educational ChallengesOral Health in the United States: The Post-Fluoride GenerationOral Health in the United States: The Post-Fluoride GenerationOral Health in the United States: The Post-Fluoride GenerationHealth Promotion in the City: A Review of Current Practice and Future Prospects in the United StatesThe Effects of Changing Weather on Public HealthThe Effects of Changing Weather on Public HealthHost-Pathogen Interactions in Emerging and Re-emerging Infectious Diseases: A Genomic Perspective of Tuberculosis, Malaria, Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection, Hepatitis B, and CholeraOral Health in the United States: The Post-Fluoride GenerationOral Health in the United States: The Post-Fluoride GenerationOral Health in the United States: The Post-Fluoride GenerationOral Health in the United States: The Post-Fluoride GenerationOral Health in the United States: The Post-Fluoride GenerationHost-Pathogen Interactions in Emerging and Re-emerging Infectious Diseases: A Genomic Perspective of Tuberculosis, Malaria, Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection, Hepatitis B, and CholeraThe Interface of Genetics and Public Health: Research and Educational ChallengesThe New Public Health LitigationHost-Pathogen Interactions in Emerging and Re-emerging Infectious Diseases: A Genomic Perspective of Tuberculosis, Malaria, Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection, Hepatitis B, and CholeraHost-Pathogen Interactions in Emerging and Re-emerging Infectious Diseases: A Genomic Perspective of Tuberculosis, Malaria, Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection, Hepatitis B, and CholeraOral Health in the United States: The Post-Fluoride GenerationReligion and Health: Public Health Research and PracticeOral Health in the United States: The Post-Fluoride GenerationCentral Role of Peroxisome Proliferator–Activated Receptors in the Actions of Peroxisome ProliferatorsThe Role of Chemokine Receptors in Primary, Effector, and Memory Immune ResponsesThe Role of Rho in G Protein-Coupled Receptor Signal TransductionIntracellular Ca2+ and Cl– Channel Activation in Secretory CellsIntracellular Ca2+ and Cl– Channel Activation in Secretory CellsThe Evolutionary Physiology of Animal Flight: Paleobiological and Present PerspectivesIntracellular Ca2+ and Cl– Channel Activation in Secretory CellsDiapauseThe Evolutionary Physiology of Animal Flight: Paleobiological and Present PerspectivesVariability in the Size, Composition, and Function of Insect Flight MusclesChloride Secretion by the Intestinal Epithelium: Molecular Basis and Regulatory AspectsDuctal Carcinoma In Situ of the BreastAge-Associated Increased Interleukin-6 Gene Expression, Late-Life Diseases, and FrailtyNew Horizons in the Treatment of Autoimmune Diseases: Immunoablation and Stem Cell TransplantationAge-Associated Increased Interleukin-6 Gene Expression, Late-Life Diseases, and FrailtyNew Horizons in the Treatment of Autoimmune Diseases: Immunoablation and Stem Cell TransplantationAcupuncture: An Evidence-Based Review of the Clinical LiteratureAnorexia and Bulimia NervosaAnorexia and Bulimia NervosaBacterial VaginosisAnorexia and Bulimia NervosaImpact of the Internet on Entomology Teaching and ResearchParasitic Mites of Honey Bees: Life History, Implications, and ImpactFunction and Morphology of the Antennal Lobe: New DevelopmentsParasitic Mites of Honey Bees: Life History, Implications, and ImpactThe Development and Evolution of Exaggerated Morphologies in InsectsHabitat Management to Conserve Natural Enemies of Arthropod Pests in AgricultureEvolutionary Ecology of Progeny Size in ArthropodsLife Systems of Polyphagous Arthropod Pests in Temporally Unstable Cropping SystemsEvolutionary Ecology of Progeny Size in ArthropodsInsect Pest Management in Tropical Asian Irrigated RiceMechanisms of Stationary Phase Mutation: A Decade of Adaptive MutationMechanisms of mRNA Surveillance in EukaryotesMechanisms of mRNA Surveillance in EukaryotesMechanisms of mRNA Surveillance in EukaryotesTWO-PARTICLE CORRELATIONS IN RELATIVISTIC HEAVY-ION COLLISIONSINCLUSIVE JET AND DIJET PRODUCTION AT THE TEVATRONLentivirus Replication and RegulationLentivirus Replication and RegulationLentivirus Replication and RegulationLentivirus Replication and RegulationLentivirus Replication and RegulationLentivirus Replication and RegulationLentivirus Replication and RegulationLentivirus Replication and RegulationLentivirus Replication and RegulationPROSPECTS FOR BUILDING A HYDROGEN ENERGY INFRASTRUCTUREPROSPECTS FOR BUILDING A HYDROGEN ENERGY INFRASTRUCTUREPROSPECTS FOR BUILDING A HYDROGEN ENERGY INFRASTRUCTUREHistorical Extinctions in the SeaHistorical Extinctions in the SeaHistorical Extinctions in the SeaHistorical Extinctions in the SeaAstrobiology: Exploring the Origins, Evolution, and Distribution of Life in the UniverseHistorical Extinctions in the SeaNUCLEAR POWER ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE: Challenges and OpportunitiesHistorical Extinctions in the SeaHistorical Extinctions in the SeaHistorical Extinctions in the SeaHistorical Extinctions in the SeaHistorical Extinctions in the SeaHistorical Extinctions in the SeaTHE ECONOMICS OF “WHEN” FLEXIBILITY IN THE DESIGN OF GREENHOUSE GAS ABATEMENT POLICIESHistorical Extinctions in the SeaPROSPECTS FOR BUILDING A HYDROGEN ENERGY INFRASTRUCTUREA REVIEW OF TECHNICAL CHANGE IN ASSESSMENT OF CLIMATE POLICYResistance of Hybrid Plants and Animals to Herbivores, Pathogens, and ParasitesAnalysis of Selection on Enzyme PolymorphismsHistorical Extinctions in the SeaEvolution of Eastern Asian and Eastern North American Disjunct Distributions in Flowering PlantsEvolution of Eastern Asian and Eastern North American Disjunct Distributions in Flowering PlantsNUCLEAR POWER ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE: Challenges and OpportunitiesEvolution of Eastern Asian and Eastern North American Disjunct Distributions in Flowering PlantsHistorical Extinctions in the SeaHARMFUL ALGAL BLOOMS: An Emerging Public Health Problem with Possible Links to Human Stress on the EnvironmentECONOMIC GROWTH, LIBERALIZATION, AND THE ENVIRONMENT: A Review of the Economic EvidenceFUEL CELLS: Reaching the Era of Clean and Efficient Power Generation in the Twenty-First CenturyEvolution of Eastern Asian and Eastern North American Disjunct Distributions in Flowering PlantsIONIC EFFECTS BEYOND POISSON-BOLTZMANN THEORYDNA Uptake in BacteriaCROSSED-BEAM STUDIES OF REACTION DYNAMICSContributions of Genome Sequencing to Understanding the Biology of Helicobacter pyloriThe Cytoskeleton of Trypanosomatid ParasitesAPPLICATIONS OF IMPULSIVE STIMULATED SCATTERING IN THE EARTH AND PLANETARY SCIENCESContributions of Genome Sequencing to Understanding the Biology of Helicobacter pyloriDENSITY FUNCTIONAL THEORY OF BIOLOGICALLY RELEVANT METAL CENTERSContributions of Genome Sequencing to Understanding the Biology of Helicobacter pyloriContributions of Genome Sequencing to Understanding the Biology of Helicobacter pyloriContributions of Genome Sequencing to Understanding the Biology of Helicobacter pyloriIONIC EFFECTS BEYOND POISSON-BOLTZMANN THEORYDENSITY FUNCTIONAL THEORY OF BIOLOGICALLY RELEVANT METAL CENTERSDENSITY FUNCTIONAL THEORY OF BIOLOGICALLY RELEVANT METAL CENTERSAPPLICATIONS OF IMPULSIVE STIMULATED SCATTERING IN THE EARTH AND PLANETARY SCIENCESViruses and ApoptosisCHEMICAL APPLICATIONS OF NEUTRON SCATTERINGCHEMICAL APPLICATIONS OF NEUTRON SCATTERINGCROSSED-BEAM STUDIES OF REACTION DYNAMICSDENSITY FUNCTIONAL THEORY OF BIOLOGICALLY RELEVANT METAL CENTERSCROWN GALL OF GRAPE: Biology and Disease ManagementTHE THREE DS OF PCR-BASED GENOMIC ANALYSIS OF PHYTOBACTERIA: Diversity, Detection, and Disease DiagnosisTHE THREE DS OF PCR-BASED GENOMIC ANALYSIS OF PHYTOBACTERIA: Diversity, Detection, and Disease DiagnosisTHE EVOLUTION OF ASEXUAL FUNGI: Reproduction, Speciation and ClassificationTHE THREE DS OF PCR-BASED GENOMIC ANALYSIS OF PHYTOBACTERIA: Diversity, Detection, and Disease DiagnosisUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsTelemedicine: Emerging e-medicineUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsTWO-DIMENSIONAL DOPANT PROFILING BY SCANNING CAPACITANCE MICROSCOPYUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsImaging Transgenic AnimalsImaging Transgenic AnimalsTelemedicine: Emerging e-medicineAirway Wall MechanicsAPPLICATIONS OF ULTRASOUND TO MATERIALS CHEMISTRYUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsMicrofabrication in Biology and MedicineUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsHEAT CONDUCTION IN NOVEL ELECTRONIC FILMSUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsAirway Wall MechanicsUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsTelemedicine: Emerging e-medicineImaging Transgenic AnimalsSCANNING SQUID MICROSCOPYUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsAPPLICATIONS OF ULTRASOUND TO MATERIALS CHEMISTRYUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsKELVIN PROBE FORCE MICROSCOPY OF MOLECULAR SURFACESImaging Transgenic AnimalsBiomechanics of Microcirculatory Blood PerfusionUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsSURFACE ROUGHENING OF HETEROEPITAXIAL THIN FILMSDIETARY FACTORS IN HUMAN COLORECTAL CANCERREGULATION OF FATTY ACID OXIDATION IN SKELETAL MUSCLEGENETIC ENGINEERING OF PLANT LIPIDSDIETARY FACTORS IN HUMAN COLORECTAL CANCERDEVELOPMENT OF FOOD PREFERENCESPSYCHOSOCIAL CORRELATES OF DIETARY INTAKE: Advancing Dietary InterventionREGULATION OF GENE EXPRESSION BY DIETARY FATGENETIC ENGINEERING OF PLANT LIPIDSREGULATION OF FATTY ACID OXIDATION IN SKELETAL MUSCLEREGULATION OF FATTY ACID OXIDATION IN SKELETAL MUSCLEREGULATION OF FATTY ACID OXIDATION IN SKELETAL MUSCLEDIETARY FACTORS IN HUMAN COLORECTAL CANCERTHE MAMMALIAN LOW-DENSITY LIPOPROTEIN RECEPTOR FAMILYGENETIC ENGINEERING OF PLANT LIPIDSDIETARY FACTORS IN HUMAN COLORECTAL CANCEROBESITY: A Major Global Public Health ProblemPSYCHOSOCIAL CORRELATES OF DIETARY INTAKE: Advancing Dietary InterventionGENETIC ENGINEERING OF PLANT LIPIDSDIETARY FACTORS IN HUMAN COLORECTAL CANCERDIETARY FACTORS IN HUMAN COLORECTAL CANCERREGULATION OF FATTY ACID OXIDATION IN SKELETAL MUSCLEVITAMIN B12 DEFICIENCY IN THE ELDERLYREGULATION OF FATTY ACID OXIDATION IN SKELETAL MUSCLEMOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF VITAMIN E TRANSPORTDEVELOPMENT OF FOOD PREFERENCESSILICONCellular and Molecular Biology of the Aquaporin Water ChannelsLEAF DEVELOPMENT IN ANGIOSPERMSLEAF DEVELOPMENT IN ANGIOSPERMSLEAF DEVELOPMENT IN ANGIOSPERMSLEAF DEVELOPMENT IN ANGIOSPERMSTolerance and Specificity of Polyketide SynthasesTHE SHIKIMATE PATHWAYMOLECULAR AND CELLULAR ASPECTS OF THE ARBUSCULAR MYCORRHIZAL SYMBIOSISeIF4 Initiation Factors: Effectors of mRNA Recruitment to Ribosomes and Regulators of TranslationMOLECULAR AND CELLULAR ASPECTS OF THE ARBUSCULAR MYCORRHIZAL SYMBIOSISStructural Motifs in RNATetrahydropterin-Dependent Amino Acid HydroxylasesCRASSULACEAN ACID METABOLISM: Molecular GeneticsLEAF DEVELOPMENT IN ANGIOSPERMSLEAF DEVELOPMENT IN ANGIOSPERMSMULTIPROTEIN-DNA COMPLEXES IN TRANSCRIPTIONAL REGULATIONPHOSPHATE ACQUISITIONLEAF DEVELOPMENT IN ANGIOSPERMSSILICONLEAF DEVELOPMENT IN ANGIOSPERMSMOLECULAR AND CELLULAR ASPECTS OF THE ARBUSCULAR MYCORRHIZAL SYMBIOSISLEAF DEVELOPMENT IN ANGIOSPERMSPatient Outcomes Research Teams: Contribution to Outcomes and Effectiveness ResearchPatient Outcomes Research Teams: Contribution to Outcomes and Effectiveness ResearchPatient Outcomes Research Teams: Contribution to Outcomes and Effectiveness ResearchLessons in Environmental Health in the Twentieth CenturyUS Health Care: A Look Ahead to 2025Pharmacy Benefit Management Companies: Dimensions of PerformancePharmacy Benefit Management Companies: Dimensions of PerformancePharmacy Benefit Management Companies: Dimensions of PerformancePatient Outcomes Research Teams: Contribution to Outcomes and Effectiveness ResearchUS Health Care: A Look Ahead to 2025US Health Care: A Look Ahead to 2025US Health Care: A Look Ahead to 2025Personal Reflections on Occupational Health in the Twentieth Century: Spiraling to the FutureA Future for Epidemiology?REDOX REGULATION OF c-Ha-ras AND OSTEOPONTIN SIGNALING IN VASCULAR SMOOTH MUSCLE CELLS: Implications in Chemical AtherogenesisDEGRADATION OF CELL PROTEINS AND THE GENERATION OF MHC CLASS I-PRESENTED PEPTIDESREDOX REGULATION OF c-Ha-ras AND OSTEOPONTIN SIGNALING IN VASCULAR SMOOTH MUSCLE CELLS: Implications in Chemical AtherogenesisREDOX REGULATION OF c-Ha-ras AND OSTEOPONTIN SIGNALING IN VASCULAR SMOOTH MUSCLE CELLS: Implications in Chemical AtherogenesisCYCLINS AND CELL CYCLE CHECKPOINTSREDOX REGULATION OF c-Ha-ras AND OSTEOPONTIN SIGNALING IN VASCULAR SMOOTH MUSCLE CELLS: Implications in Chemical AtherogenesisREDOX REGULATION OF c-Ha-ras AND OSTEOPONTIN SIGNALING IN VASCULAR SMOOTH MUSCLE CELLS: Implications in Chemical AtherogenesisGENETIC DISEASES AND GENE KNOCKOUTS REVEAL DIVERSE CONNEXIN FUNCTIONSCELLULAR AND MOLECULAR BASIS FOR ELECTRICAL RHYTHMICITY IN GASTROINTESTINAL MUSCLESHEAT-SHOCK PROTEINS, MOLECULAR CHAPERONES, AND THE STRESS RESPONSE: Evolutionary and Ecological PhysiologyIONIC CONDUCTANCES IN GASTROINTESTINAL SMOOTH MUSCLES AND INTERSTITIAL CELLS OF CAJALSODIUM-COUPLED TRANSPORTERS FOR KREBS CYCLE INTERMEDIATESIONIC CONDUCTANCES IN GASTROINTESTINAL SMOOTH MUSCLES AND INTERSTITIAL CELLS OF CAJALCELLULAR AND MOLECULAR BASIS FOR ELECTRICAL RHYTHMICITY IN GASTROINTESTINAL MUSCLESCONTROVERSIAL ISSUES IN VERTEBRATE OLFACTORY TRANSDUCTIONBiology of Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease: Pathophysiology Relating to Medical and Surgical TreatmentInsights from the Study of Heart Rate VariabilityNew Transfusion Strategies: Red Cell SubstitutesThe Biology of Cystitis: Host and Bacterial FactorsCyclosporine Treatment of Glomerular DiseasesBiology of Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease: Pathophysiology Relating to Medical and Surgical TreatmentBiology of Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease: Pathophysiology Relating to Medical and Surgical TreatmentBiology of Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease: Pathophysiology Relating to Medical and Surgical TreatmentInsights from the Study of Heart Rate VariabilityCONGRUENCE AND CONTROVERSY: Toward a Higher-Level Phylogeny of DipteraCONGRUENCE AND CONTROVERSY: Toward a Higher-Level Phylogeny of DipteraINFLUENCE OF THE LARVAL HOST PLANT ON REPRODUCTIVE STRATEGIES OF CERAMBYCID BEETLESHYPERPARASITISM: Multitrophic Ecology and BehaviorADAPTIVE STRATEGIES OF EDAPHIC ARTHROPODSNUTRITION AND CULTURE OF ENTOMOPHAGOUS INSECTSEMERGING AND RESURGING VECTOR-BORNE DISEASESCONGRUENCE AND CONTROVERSY: Toward a Higher-Level Phylogeny of DipteraTHE ROLE OF STINGLESS BEES IN CROP POLLINATIONINFLUENCE OF THE LARVAL HOST PLANT ON REPRODUCTIVE STRATEGIES OF CERAMBYCID BEETLESINFLUENCE OF THE LARVAL HOST PLANT ON REPRODUCTIVE STRATEGIES OF CERAMBYCID BEETLESASSESSMENT OF THE APPLICATION OF BACULOVIRUSES FOR CONTROL OF LEPIDOPTERAINSECT P450 ENZYMESINFLUENCE OF THE LARVAL HOST PLANT ON REPRODUCTIVE STRATEGIES OF CERAMBYCID BEETLESASSESSMENT OF THE APPLICATION OF BACULOVIRUSES FOR CONTROL OF LEPIDOPTERAHYPERPARASITISM: Multitrophic Ecology and BehaviorASSESSMENT OF THE APPLICATION OF BACULOVIRUSES FOR CONTROL OF LEPIDOPTERAINSECT P450 ENZYMESEMERGING AND RESURGING VECTOR-BORNE DISEASESDENSITY-DEPENDENT PHYSIOLOGICAL PHASE IN INSECTSADAPTIVE STRATEGIES OF EDAPHIC ARTHROPODSDENSITY-DEPENDENT PHYSIOLOGICAL PHASE IN INSECTSINSECT P450 ENZYMESASSESSMENT OF THE APPLICATION OF BACULOVIRUSES FOR CONTROL OF LEPIDOPTERAALTERNATIVE SPLICING OF PRE-mRNA: Developmental Consequences and Mechanisms of RegulationALTERNATIVE SPLICING OF PRE-mRNA: Developmental Consequences and Mechanisms of RegulationALTERNATIVE SPLICING OF PRE-mRNA: Developmental Consequences and Mechanisms of RegulationTHE LEPTOTENE-ZYGOTENE TRANSITION OF MEIOSISTHE CRITICAL ROLE OF CHROMOSOME TRANSLOCATIONS IN HUMAN LEUKEMIASTHE DIVERSE AND DYNAMIC STRUCTURE OF BACTERIAL GENOMESMATING-TYPE GENE SWITCHING IN SACCHAROMYCES CEREVISIAEALTERNATIVE SPLICING OF PRE-mRNA: Developmental Consequences and Mechanisms of RegulationMATING-TYPE GENE SWITCHING IN SACCHAROMYCES CEREVISIAEACCELERATOR-DRIVEN SYSTEMS FOR NUCLEAR WASTE TRANSMUTATIONKINETOCHORES AND THE CHECKPOINT MECHANISM THAT MONITORS FOR DEFECTS IN THE CHROMOSOME SEGREGATION MACHINERYALZHEIMER'S DISEASE: Genetic Studies and Transgenic ModelsTHE LEPTOTENE-ZYGOTENE TRANSITION OF MEIOSISMOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF BACTERIOCIN EVOLUTIONKINETOCHORES AND THE CHECKPOINT MECHANISM THAT MONITORS FOR DEFECTS IN THE CHROMOSOME SEGREGATION MACHINERYKINETOCHORES AND THE CHECKPOINT MECHANISM THAT MONITORS FOR DEFECTS IN THE CHROMOSOME SEGREGATION MACHINERYKINETOCHORES AND THE CHECKPOINT MECHANISM THAT MONITORS FOR DEFECTS IN THE CHROMOSOME SEGREGATION MACHINERYKINETOCHORES AND THE CHECKPOINT MECHANISM THAT MONITORS FOR DEFECTS IN THE CHROMOSOME SEGREGATION MACHINERYCARBON AND CARBONATE METABOLISM IN COASTAL AQUATIC ECOSYSTEMSRECYCLING METALS FOR THE ENVIRONMENTRECYCLING METALS FOR THE ENVIRONMENTCARBON AND CARBONATE METABOLISM IN COASTAL AQUATIC ECOSYSTEMSBACTERIAL GROWTH EFFICIENCY IN NATURAL AQUATIC SYSTEMSBACTERIAL GROWTH EFFICIENCY IN NATURAL AQUATIC SYSTEMSFUTURE TECHNOLOGIES FOR ENERGY-EFFICIENT IRON AND STEEL MAKINGCARBON AND CARBONATE METABOLISM IN COASTAL AQUATIC ECOSYSTEMSVERTEBRATE HERBIVORES IN MARINE AND TERRESTRIAL ENVIRONMENTS: A Nutritional Ecology PerspectiveCARBON AND CARBONATE METABOLISM IN COASTAL AQUATIC ECOSYSTEMSRECYCLING METALS FOR THE ENVIRONMENTNANOCRYSTAL SUPERLATTICESROLE OF TIGHT JUNCTIONS IN ESTABLISHING AND MAINTAINING CELL POLARITYTHYMINE METABOLISM AND THYMINELESS DEATH IN PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTESTHYMINE METABOLISM AND THYMINELESS DEATH IN PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTESTHE LUTEINIZING HORMONE RECEPTORTHE ANTI-SIGMA FACTORSCOMPUTER SIMULATIONS WITH EXPLICIT SOLVENT: Recent Progress in the Thermodynamic Decomposition of Free Energies and in Modeling Electrostatic EffectsPROTEOLYTIC ACTIVITIES THAT MEDIATE APOPTOSISTHE ANTI-SIGMA FACTORSTHINKING ABOUT BACTERIAL POPULATIONS AS MULTICELLULAR ORGANISMSTHYMINE METABOLISM AND THYMINELESS DEATH IN PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTESTHE ANTI-SIGMA FACTORSCHEMICAL REACTION DYNAMICS BEYOND THE BORN-OPPENHEIMER APPROXIMATIONSPECTROSCOPY OF ATOMS AND MOLECULES IN LIQUID HELIUMTHYMINE METABOLISM AND THYMINELESS DEATH IN PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTESHOW DO ANIMAL DNA VIRUSES GET TO THE NUCLEUS?NANOCRYSTAL SUPERLATTICESAGING IN SACCHAROMYCES CEREVISIAEPROTEOLYTIC ACTIVITIES THAT MEDIATE APOPTOSISMOLECULES IN OPTICAL, ELECTRIC, AND MAGNETIC FIELDS: A Personal PerspectiveTHYMINE METABOLISM AND THYMINELESS DEATH IN PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTESNANOCRYSTAL SUPERLATTICESTHE PHYSIOLOGY OF PARATHYROID HORMONE-RELATED PROTEIN: An Emerging Role as a Developmental FactorTHYMINE METABOLISM AND THYMINELESS DEATH IN PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTESSPECTROSCOPY OF ATOMS AND MOLECULES IN LIQUID HELIUMCOOPERATIVE ORGANIZATION OF BACTERIAL COLONIES: From Genotype to MorphotypeNEW PERSPECTIVES ON MICROBIAL DEHALOGENATION OF CHLORINATED SOLVENTS: Insights from the FieldSPECTROSCOPY OF ATOMS AND MOLECULES IN LIQUID HELIUMCURRENT CONCEPTS OF ACTIVE DEFENSE IN PLANTSCURRENT CONCEPTS OF ACTIVE DEFENSE IN PLANTSHOMOSERINE LACTONE-MEDIATED GENE REGULATION IN PLANT-ASSOCIATED BACTERIAHOMOSERINE LACTONE-MEDIATED GENE REGULATION IN PLANT-ASSOCIATED BACTERIAGENETICS AND PHYSIOLOGY OF AFLATOXIN BIOSYNTHESISHOMOSERINE LACTONE-MEDIATED GENE REGULATION IN PLANT-ASSOCIATED BACTERIASPIN-DEPENDENT TRANSPORT AND LOW-FIELD MAGNETORESISTANCE IN DOPED MANGANITESPROCESSING AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PIEZOELECTRIC MATERIALS AND INTEGRATION INTO MICROELECTROMECHANICAL SYSTEMSTHE ROLE OF METASTABLE STATES IN POLYMER PHASE TRANSITIONS: Concepts, Principles, and Experimental ObservationsPROCESSING TECHNOLOGIES FOR FERROELECTRIC THIN FILMS AND HETEROSTRUCTURESBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSNUTRITIONAL AND HORMONAL REGULATION OF ENZYMES IN FAT SYNTHESIS: Studies of Fatty Acid Synthase and Mitochondrial Glycerol-3-Phosphate Acyltransferase Gene TranscriptionNUTRITIONAL AND HORMONAL REGULATION OF ENZYMES IN FAT SYNTHESIS: Studies of Fatty Acid Synthase and Mitochondrial Glycerol-3-Phosphate Acyltransferase Gene TranscriptionBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSCYCLIC AMP SIGNALING AND GENE REGULATIONBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSPERSONAL REFLECTIONS ON A GALVANIZING TRAILDIET, NUTRITION, AND PROSTATE CANCERNUTRITIONAL AND HORMONAL REGULATION OF ENZYMES IN FAT SYNTHESIS: Studies of Fatty Acid Synthase and Mitochondrial Glycerol-3-Phosphate Acyltransferase Gene TranscriptionNUTRITIONAL AND HORMONAL REGULATION OF ENZYMES IN FAT SYNTHESIS: Studies of Fatty Acid Synthase and Mitochondrial Glycerol-3-Phosphate Acyltransferase Gene TranscriptionNUTRITIONAL AND HORMONAL REGULATION OF ENZYMES IN FAT SYNTHESIS: Studies of Fatty Acid Synthase and Mitochondrial Glycerol-3-Phosphate Acyltransferase Gene TranscriptionBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSREDEFINING BODY COMPOSITION: Nutrients, Hormones, and Genes in Meat ProductionBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSDIET, NUTRITION, AND PROSTATE CANCERBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSNITROGEN CYCLING IN THE GUTDIET, NUTRITION, AND PROSTATE CANCERBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSDIETARY FRUCTANSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSDIETARY FRUCTANSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSPLANT CELL WALL PROTEINSPHYTOREMEDIATIONTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSABSCISIC ACID SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONMODIFIED OLIGONUCLEOTIDES: Synthesis and Strategy for UsersLESSONS FROM SEQUENCING OF THE GENOME OF A UNICELLULAR CYANOBACTERIUM, SYNECHOCYSTIS SP. PCC6803PHOTOSYNTHETIC CYTOCHROMES c IN CYANOBACTERIA, ALGAE, AND PLANTSPHOTOSYNTHETIC CYTOCHROMES c IN CYANOBACTERIA, ALGAE, AND PLANTSNUCLEOCYTOPLASMIC TRANSPORT: The Soluble PhaseTHE STRUCTURE AND MECHANISM OF PROTEIN PHOSPHATASES: Insights into Catalysis and RegulationABSCISIC ACID SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONDESATURATION AND RELATED MODIFICATIONS OF FATTY ACIDSPLANT CELL WALL PROTEINSNUCLEOCYTOPLASMIC TRANSPORT: The Soluble PhasePHYTOREMEDIATIONPLANT CELL WALL PROTEINSASCORBATE AND GLUTATHIONE: Keeping Active Oxygen Under ControlMOLECULAR-GENETIC ANALYSIS OF PLANT CYTOCHROME P450-DEPENDENT MONOOXYGENASESABSCISIC ACID SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONMOLECULAR BIOLOGY OF CATION TRANSPORT IN PLANTSPLANT CELL WALL PROTEINSPHYTOREMEDIATIONPLANT CELL WALL PROTEINSABSCISIC ACID SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONABSCISIC ACID SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONABSCISIC ACID SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONABSCISIC ACID SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONPHOTOSYNTHETIC CYTOCHROMES c IN CYANOBACTERIA, ALGAE, AND PLANTSABSCISIC ACID SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONROLE OF SMALL G PROTEINS IN YEAST CELL POLARIZATION AND WALL BIOSYNTHESISABSCISIC ACID SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONDNA METHYLATION IN PLANTSMOLECULAR-GENETIC ANALYSIS OF PLANT CYTOCHROME P450-DEPENDENT MONOOXYGENASESPHYTOREMEDIATIONPHYTOREMEDIATIONABSCISIC ACID SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONPLANT CELL WALL PROTEINSSPATIO-TEMPORAL RESOLUTION OF EXOCYTOSIS FROM INDIVIDUAL CELLSEVOLUTION OF LIGHT-REGULATED PLANT PROMOTERSASCORBATE AND GLUTATHIONE: Keeping Active Oxygen Under ControlDESATURATION AND RELATED MODIFICATIONS OF FATTY ACIDSASCORBATE AND GLUTATHIONE: Keeping Active Oxygen Under ControlDESATURATION AND RELATED MODIFICATIONS OF FATTY ACIDSRNA LOCALIZATION IN DEVELOPMENTRNA LOCALIZATION IN DEVELOPMENTSTRUCTURE, DYNAMICS, AND FUNCTION OF CHROMATIN IN VITROASCORBATE AND GLUTATHIONE: Keeping Active Oxygen Under ControlMOLECULAR-GENETIC ANALYSIS OF PLANT CYTOCHROME P450-DEPENDENT MONOOXYGENASESEVOLUTION OF LIGHT-REGULATED PLANT PROMOTERSRNA LOCALIZATION IN DEVELOPMENTTHE USE OF 2H, 13C, 15N MULTIDIMENSIONAL NMR GTO STUDY THE STRUCTURE AND DYNAMICS OF PROTEINSPHOTOSYNTHETIC CYTOCHROMES c IN CYANOBACTERIA, ALGAE, AND PLANTSBIOSENSORS IN CHEMICAL SEPARATIONSDNA METHYLATION IN PLANTSPLANT CELL WALL PROTEINSDNA METHYLATION IN PLANTSDNA METHYLATION IN PLANTSTHE STRUCTURE AND MECHANISM OF PROTEIN PHOSPHATASES: Insights into Catalysis and RegulationPHYTOREMEDIATIONPHYTOREMEDIATIONMOLECULAR-GENETIC ANALYSIS OF PLANT CYTOCHROME P450-DEPENDENT MONOOXYGENASESABSCISIC ACID SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONPLANT CELL WALL PROTEINSDNA METHYLATION IN PLANTSMOLECULAR BIOLOGY OF CATION TRANSPORT IN PLANTSPREVENTING YOUTH VIOLENCE: What Works?PREVENTING YOUTH VIOLENCE: What Works?TOBACCO DEPENDENCE TREATMENTS: Review and ProspectusTOBACCO DEPENDENCE TREATMENTS: Review and ProspectusMANAGED CARE AND PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENTS: Who is Responsible for the Health of the Population?TOBACCO DEPENDENCE TREATMENTS: Review and ProspectusTOBACCO DEPENDENCE TREATMENTS: Review and ProspectusTOBACCO DEPENDENCE TREATMENTS: Review and ProspectusTOBACCO DEPENDENCE TREATMENTS: Review and ProspectusPUBLIC HEALTH IN CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPE AND THE ROLE OF ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTIONPUBLIC HEALTH IN CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPE AND THE ROLE OF ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTIONINSIGHTS FROM IN VIVO MODIFICATION OF ADRENERGIC RECEPTOR GENE EXPRESSIONPREDICTIVE VALUE OF IN VITRO MODEL SYSTEMS IN TOXICOLOGYCD40 AND CD154 IN CELL-MEDIATED IMMUNITYCD40 AND CD154 IN CELL-MEDIATED IMMUNITYTHE PHARMACOLOGY AND TOXICOLOGY OF POLYPHENOLIC-GLUTATHIONE CONJUGATESTHE PHARMACOLOGY AND TOXICOLOGY OF POLYPHENOLIC-GLUTATHIONE CONJUGATESTHE PHARMACOLOGY AND TOXICOLOGY OF POLYPHENOLIC-GLUTATHIONE CONJUGATESCANNABINOID RECEPTORS AND THEIR ENDOGENOUS AGONISTSFunctional Neuroimaging Studies of Depression: The Anatomy of MelancholiaSustainability of Transgenic Insecticidal Cultivars: Integrating Pest Genetics and EcologyNEW INSECTICIDES WITH ECDYSTEROIDAL AND JUVENILE HORMONE ACTIVITYPARASITES AND PATHOGENS OF MITESManipulating Natural Enemies By Plant Variety Selection and Modification: A Realistic Strategy?PARASITES AND PATHOGENS OF MITESSustainability of Transgenic Insecticidal Cultivars: Integrating Pest Genetics and EcologyNutritional Interactions in Insect-Microbial Symbioses: Aphids and Their Symbiotic Bacteria BuchneraPARASITES AND PATHOGENS OF MITESVIRAL TRANSACTIVATING PROTEINSA REVIEW OF GRAVITATIONAL WAVE DETECTORSHOST-PATHOGEN INTERACTIONS DURING ENTRY AND ACTIN-BASED MOVEMENT OF LISTERIA MONOCYTOGENESTERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEM FEEDBACKS TO GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGEThe Ecology of Interfaces: Riparian ZonesSpecies Turnover and the Regulation of Trophic StructureINTEGRATED ASSESSMENT MODELS OF GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGETERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEM FEEDBACKS TO GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGEThe Role of Hybridization and Introgression in the Diversification of AnimalsREGIONAL PHOTOCHEMICAL AIR QUALITY MODELING:Model Formulations, History, and State of the ScienceRENEWABLE ENERGY TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY FOR DEVELOPMENTToward an Integration of Landscape and Food Web Ecology: The Dynamics of Spatially Subsidized Food WebsSpecies Turnover and the Regulation of Trophic StructureSpecies Turnover and the Regulation of Trophic StructureAN ASSESSMENT OF WORLD HYDROCARBON RESOURCESINTEGRATED ASSESSMENT MODELS OF GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGEEvolutionary Genetics of Life CyclesCONTROL OF M-CURRENTTHEORETICAL STUDIES OF CHEMICAL DYNAMICS: Overview of Some Fundamental MechanismsRNA VIRUS MUTATIONS AND FITNESS FOR SURVIVALINFRARED AND RAMAN VIBRATIONAL OPTICAL ACTIVITY: Theoretical and Experimental AspectsCELLULAR AND MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF PULMONARY VASCULAR REMODELINGCHEMICAL ACTIVATORS OF SENSORY NEURONSCELL-CELL COMMUNICATION IN GRAM-POSITIVE BACTERIACYTOPLASMIC ATP-DEPENDENT REGULATION OF ION TRANSPORTERS AND CHANNELS: Mechanisms and MessengersCHEMICAL ACTIVATORS OF SENSORY NEURONSREGULATORS OF APOPTOSIS ON THE ROAD TO PERSISTENT ALPHAVIRUS INFECTIONSPECIFIC, NONGENOMIC ACTIONS OF STEROID HORMONESCELL-CELL COMMUNICATION IN GRAM-POSITIVE BACTERIACELLULAR AND MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF PULMONARY VASCULAR REMODELINGSTATE-RESOLVED COLLISION-INDUCED ELECTRONIC TRANSITIONSCHEMICAL ACTIVATORS OF SENSORY NEURONSCYTOPLASMIC ATP-DEPENDENT REGULATION OF ION TRANSPORTERS AND CHANNELS: Mechanisms and MessengersCELL-CELL COMMUNICATION IN GRAM-POSITIVE BACTERIACELL-CELL COMMUNICATION IN GRAM-POSITIVE BACTERIATIME-RESOLVED DYNAMICS OF PROTON TRANSFER IN PROTEINOUS SYSTEMSTIME-RESOLVED DYNAMICS OF PROTON TRANSFER IN PROTEINOUS SYSTEMSIN MY TIME: Scenes of Scientific LifeREGULATORS OF APOPTOSIS ON THE ROAD TO PERSISTENT ALPHAVIRUS INFECTIONCELLULAR AND MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF PULMONARY VASCULAR REMODELINGTIME-RESOLVED DYNAMICS OF PROTON TRANSFER IN PROTEINOUS SYSTEMSCONTROL OF M-CURRENTCYTOPLASMIC ATP-DEPENDENT REGULATION OF ION TRANSPORTERS AND CHANNELS: Mechanisms and MessengersCYTOPLASMIC ATP-DEPENDENT REGULATION OF ION TRANSPORTERS AND CHANNELS: Mechanisms and MessengersBEVERLY T. GALLOWAY: Visionary AdministratorBarley Yellow Dwarf VirusesMICROBIAL POPULATION DYNAMICS ON LEAVESPHOTOREFRACTIVE POLYMERSCHARACTERIZATION OF POLYMER SURFACES WITH ATOMIC FORCE MICROSCOPYBISTABLE CHOLESTERIC REFLECTIVE DISPLAYS: Materials and Drive SchemesBINDER REMOVAL FROM CERAMICSCHARACTERIZATION OF POLYMER SURFACES WITH ATOMIC FORCE MICROSCOPYROLE OF NUTRITION IN PREVENTION OF THE PROGRESSION OF RENAL DISEASEENERGY SOURCES AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE EXERCISING HORSEDEVELOPMENT AND BIOMEDICAL TESTING OF MILITARY OPERATIONAL RATIONSNUTRITION SCREENING IN OLD PEOPLE: Its Place in a Coherent Practice of Preventive Health CareINTRACELLULAR LIPID-BINDING PROTEINS AND THEIR GENESINTRACELLULAR LIPID-BINDING PROTEINS AND THEIR GENESDEVELOPMENT AND BIOMEDICAL TESTING OF MILITARY OPERATIONAL RATIONSENERGY SOURCES AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE EXERCISING HORSEDYNAMIC O-LINKED GLYCOSYLATION OF NUCLEAR AND CYTOSKELETAL PROTEINSDYNAMIC O-LINKED GLYCOSYLATION OF NUCLEAR AND CYTOSKELETAL PROTEINSTHE ATP SYNTHASE—A SPLENDID MOLECULAR MACHINETHE ATP SYNTHASE—A SPLENDID MOLECULAR MACHINEDYNAMIC O-LINKED GLYCOSYLATION OF NUCLEAR AND CYTOSKELETAL PROTEINSREPLICATION PROTEIN A: A Heterotrimeric, Single-Stranded DNA-Binding Protein Required for Eukaryotic DNA MetabolismREPLICATION PROTEIN A: A Heterotrimeric, Single-Stranded DNA-Binding Protein Required for Eukaryotic DNA MetabolismREGULATION OF PHOSPHOENOLPYRUVATE CARBOXYKINASE (GTP) GENE EXPRESSIONMOLECULAR BASIS FOR MEMBRANE PHOSPHOLIPID DIVERSITY: Why Are There So Many Lipids?G PROTEIN MECHANISMS: Insights from Structural AnalysisGENETICS OF ANGIOSPERM SHOOT APICAL MERISTEM DEVELOPMENTTHE MOLECULAR STRUCTURE OF CELL ADHESION MOLECULESREGULATION OF PHOSPHOENOLPYRUVATE CARBOXYKINASE (GTP) GENE EXPRESSIONMETABOLITE TRANSPORT ACROSS SYMBIOTIC MEMBRANES OF LEGUME NODULESSINGLE-PARTICLE TRACKING:Applications to Membrane DynamicsGIBBERELLIN BIOSYNTHESIS: Enzymes, Genes and Their RegulationOPTICAL DETECTION OF SINGLE MOLECULESBASIC MECHANISMS OF TRANSCRIPT ELONGATION AND ITS REGULATIONBASIC MECHANISMS OF TRANSCRIPT ELONGATION AND ITS REGULATIONPROTEIN FOLDING: The EndgameRIBOSOMES AND TRANSLATIONTHE ETHYLENE RESPONSE PATHWAY IN ARABIDOPSISADVANCED EPR SPECTROSCOPY ON ELECTRON TRANSFER PROCESSES IN PHOTOSYNTHESIS AND BIOMIMETIC MODEL SYSTEMSDYNAMIC O-LINKED GLYCOSYLATION OF NUCLEAR AND CYTOSKELETAL PROTEINSADVANCED EPR SPECTROSCOPY ON ELECTRON TRANSFER PROCESSES IN PHOTOSYNTHESIS AND BIOMIMETIC MODEL SYSTEMSADVANCED EPR SPECTROSCOPY ON ELECTRON TRANSFER PROCESSES IN PHOTOSYNTHESIS AND BIOMIMETIC MODEL SYSTEMSPROTEIN FOLDING: The EndgameALTERNATIVE OXIDASE: From Gene to FunctionOPTICAL DETECTION OF SINGLE MOLECULESRIBOSOMES AND TRANSLATIONBASIC MECHANISMS OF TRANSCRIPT ELONGATION AND ITS REGULATIONSTRUCTURE-BASED PERSPECTIVES ON B12-DEPENDENT ENZYMESBASIC MECHANISMS OF TRANSCRIPT ELONGATION AND ITS REGULATIONBASIC MECHANISMS OF TRANSCRIPT ELONGATION AND ITS REGULATIONBASIC MECHANISMS OF TRANSCRIPT ELONGATION AND ITS REGULATIONREGULATION OF EUKARYOTIC PHOSPHATIDYLINOSITOL-SPECIFIC PHOSPHOLIPASE C AND PHOSPHOLIPASE DFOOD SAFETY REGULATION:Reforming the Delaney ClauseFOOD SAFETY REGULATION:Reforming the Delaney ClauseMORAL AND POLICY ISSUES IN LONG-ACTING CONTRACEPTIONREINVENTING PUBLIC HEALTHREINVENTING PUBLIC HEALTHSchool-Based Health Clinics: Remaining Viable in a Changing Health Care Delivery SystemREINVENTING PUBLIC HEALTHCAPTURE AND PROCESSING OF EXOGENOUS ANTIGENS FOR PRESENTATION ON MHC MOLECULESCAPTURE AND PROCESSING OF EXOGENOUS ANTIGENS FOR PRESENTATION ON MHC MOLECULESESTROGENS AND ATHEROSCLEROSISTHE HEME OXYGENASE SYSTEM:A Regulator of Second Messenger GasesESTROGENS AND ATHEROSCLEROSISSTRUCTURE-FUNCTION ASPECTS IN THE NITRIC OXIDE SYNTHASESENZYMATIC METHYLATION OF ARSENIC SPECIES AND OTHER NEW APPROACHES TO ARSENIC TOXICITYMOLECULAR DETERMINANTS OF DRUG BINDING AND ACTION ON L-TYPE CALCIUM CHANNELSSTRUCTURE-FUNCTION ASPECTS IN THE NITRIC OXIDE SYNTHASESENZYMATIC METHYLATION OF ARSENIC SPECIES AND OTHER NEW APPROACHES TO ARSENIC TOXICITYG PROTEIN βγ SUBUNITSSTRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF THE β3-ADRENERGIC RECEPTORPROTOZOAL AGENTS: What Are the Dangers for the Public Water Supply?MARKERS FOR PREDICTING THE DEVELOPMENT OF ACUTE RESPIRATORY DISTRESS SYNDROMEBEREAVEMENT AND LATE-LIFE DEPRESSION: Grief and Its Complications in the ElderlyNEUROPSYCHIATRIC CONSEQUENCES OF STROKEPHOTOPERIODIC TIME MEASUREMENT AND RELATED PHYSIOLOGICAL MECHANISMS IN INSECTS AND MITESECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION OF GALLING THRIPS AND THEIR ALLIESGENETIC DISSECTION OF SEXUAL BEHAVIOR IN DROSOPHILA MELANOGASTERBEHAVIOR AND ECOLOGICAL GENETICS OF WIND-BORNE MIGRATION BY INSECTSBIONOMICS OF THE FACE FLY, MUSCA AUTUMNALISBEHAVIOR AND ECOLOGICAL GENETICS OF WIND-BORNE MIGRATION BY INSECTSGENETIC DISSECTION OF SEXUAL BEHAVIOR IN DROSOPHILA MELANOGASTERBIOLOGY OF WOLBACHIABEHAVIOR AND ECOLOGICAL GENETICS OF WIND-BORNE MIGRATION BY INSECTSBEHAVIOR AND ECOLOGICAL GENETICS OF WIND-BORNE MIGRATION BY INSECTSSYSTEMATICS OF MOSQUITO DISEASE VECTORS (DIPTERA, CULICIDAE):Impact of Molecular Biology and Cladistic AnalysisBEHAVIOR AND ECOLOGICAL GENETICS OF WIND-BORNE MIGRATION BY INSECTSINSECTS AS TEACHING TOOLS IN PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATIONBEHAVIOR AND ECOLOGICAL GENETICS OF WIND-BORNE MIGRATION BY INSECTSDIPTERA AS PARASITOIDSPHYLOGENETIC ANALYSIS IN MOLECULAR EVOLUTIONARY GENETICSTHE SEARCH FOR THE QUARK-GLUON PLASMAPHYLOGENETIC ANALYSIS IN MOLECULAR EVOLUTIONARY GENETICSPRODUCTION OF HEAVY QUARKONIUM IN HIGH-ENERGY COLLIDERSPRODUCTION OF HEAVY QUARKONIUM IN HIGH-ENERGY COLLIDERSENERGY AND RESOURCE CONSTRAINTS ON INTENSIVE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIONOVERVIEW AND EVALUATION OF FUEL ETHANOL FROM CELLULOSIC BIOMASS: Technology, Economics, the Environment, and PolicyOVERVIEW AND EVALUATION OF FUEL ETHANOL FROM CELLULOSIC BIOMASS: Technology, Economics, the Environment, and PolicyPROGRESS COMMERCIALIZING SOLAR-ELECTRIC POWER SYSTEMSMICROBIAL DIVERSITY: Domains and KingdomsENERGY AND RESOURCE CONSTRAINTS ON INTENSIVE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIONPROGRESS COMMERCIALIZING SOLAR-ELECTRIC POWER SYSTEMSENVIRONMENTAL LIFE-CYCLE COMPARISONS OF RECYCLING, LANDFILLING, AND INCINERATION: A Review of Recent StudiesOVERVIEW AND EVALUATION OF FUEL ETHANOL FROM CELLULOSIC BIOMASS: Technology, Economics, the Environment, and PolicyDEMOGRAPHIC AND GENETIC MODELS IN CONSERVATION BIOLOGY: Applications and Perspectives for Tropical Rain Forest Tree SpeciesENERGY AND RESOURCE CONSTRAINTS ON INTENSIVE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIONDEMOGRAPHIC AND GENETIC MODELS IN CONSERVATION BIOLOGY: Applications and Perspectives for Tropical Rain Forest Tree SpeciesENVIRONMENTAL LIFE-CYCLE COMPARISONS OF RECYCLING, LANDFILLING, AND INCINERATION: A Review of Recent StudiesDEMOGRAPHIC AND GENETIC MODELS IN CONSERVATION BIOLOGY: Applications and Perspectives for Tropical Rain Forest Tree SpeciesSECURITY OF FISSILE MATERIALS IN RUSSIAMICROBIAL DIVERSITY: Domains and KingdomsOVERVIEW AND EVALUATION OF FUEL ETHANOL FROM CELLULOSIC BIOMASS: Technology, Economics, the Environment, and PolicyOVERVIEW AND EVALUATION OF FUEL ETHANOL FROM CELLULOSIC BIOMASS: Technology, Economics, the Environment, and PolicyOVERVIEW AND EVALUATION OF FUEL ETHANOL FROM CELLULOSIC BIOMASS: Technology, Economics, the Environment, and PolicyOVERVIEW AND EVALUATION OF FUEL ETHANOL FROM CELLULOSIC BIOMASS: Technology, Economics, the Environment, and PolicyMICROBIAL DIVERSITY: Domains and KingdomsSOME RECENT TRENDS IN GRAMMATICALIZATIONTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE ANTHROPOLOGY OF PHARMACEUTICALS: A Biographical ApproachTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE ANTHROPOLOGY OF PHARMACEUTICALS: A Biographical ApproachTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE ANTHROPOLOGY OF CITIES: Imagining and Theorizing the CityTHE ANTHROPOLOGY OF CITIES: Imagining and Theorizing the CityTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE ANTHROPOLOGY OF PHARMACEUTICALS: A Biographical ApproachTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE PARADOX OF CHILD LABOR AND ANTHROPOLOGYTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESSOME RECENT TRENDS IN GRAMMATICALIZATIONTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESHOLOCENE BIODIVERSITY: An Archaeological Perspective from the AmericasHOLOCENE BIODIVERSITY: An Archaeological Perspective from the AmericasTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIES“THE POPULAR” IN AMERICAN CULTURETHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESHOLOCENE BIODIVERSITY: An Archaeological Perspective from the AmericasTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE ANTHROPOLOGY OF PHARMACEUTICALS: A Biographical ApproachTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE BIOCHEMISTRY AND GENETICS OF CAPSULAR POLYSACCHARIDE PRODUCTION IN BACTERIATHE SPECTROSCOPY OF SOLVATION IN HYDROGEN-BONDED AROMATIC CLUSTERSTHE SPECTROSCOPY OF SOLVATION IN HYDROGEN-BONDED AROMATIC CLUSTERSTHE SPECTROSCOPY OF SOLVATION IN HYDROGEN-BONDED AROMATIC CLUSTERSMECHANISMS OF ADHESION BY ORAL BACTERIAMECHANISMS OF ADHESION BY ORAL BACTERIAWHAT SIZE SHOULD A BACTERIUM BE? A Question of ScaleWHAT SIZE SHOULD A BACTERIUM BE? A Question of ScaleLIVE ATTENUATED VARICELLA VACCINESOME CHEMICAL AND STRUCTURAL EFFECTS ON THE PROPERTIES OF HIGH-Tc SUPERCONDUCTORSTHE BIOCHEMISTRY AND GENETICS OF CAPSULAR POLYSACCHARIDE PRODUCTION IN BACTERIATOWARDS A UNIFIED EVOLUTIONARY GENETICS OF MICROORGANISMSMECHANISMS OF ADHESION BY ORAL BACTERIABACTERIAL HEAVY METAL RESISTANCE: New SurprisesBACTERIAL HEAVY METAL RESISTANCE: New SurprisesLIVE ATTENUATED VARICELLA VACCINEBACTERIAL HEAVY METAL RESISTANCE: New SurprisesBACTERIAL AVIRULENCE GENESOZONE AND PLANT HEALTHOZONE AND PLANT HEALTHFUNGAL TRANSMISSION OF PLANT VIRUSESQTL MAPPING AND QUANTITATIVE DISEASE RESISTANCE IN PLANTSOZONE AND PLANT HEALTHOZONE AND PLANT HEALTHDWARF BUNT: Politics, Identification, and BiologyBACTERIAL AVIRULENCE GENESROLE AND REGULATION OF SUCROSE-PHOSPHATE SYNTHASE IN HIGHER PLANTSBIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY OF WAX PRODUCTION IN PLANTSTHE MOLECULAR BASIS OF DEHYDRATION TOLERANCE IN PLANTSROLE AND REGULATION OF SUCROSE-PHOSPHATE SYNTHASE IN HIGHER PLANTSTHE ORGANIZATION AND REGULATION OF PLANT GLYCOLYSISSOME NEW STRUCTURAL ASPECTS AND OLD CONTROVERSIES CONCERNING THE CYTOCHROME b6f COMPLEX OF OXYGENIC PHOTOSYNTHESISBIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY OF WAX PRODUCTION IN PLANTSMEMBRANE TRANSPORT CARRIERSBIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY OF WAX PRODUCTION IN PLANTSCARBOHYDRATE-MODULATED GENE EXPRESSION IN PLANTSTHE MOLECULAR-GENETICS OF NITROGEN ASSIMILATION INTO AMINO ACIDS IN HIGHER PLANTS14-3-3 PROTEINS AND SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONTHE MOLECULAR BASIS OF DEHYDRATION TOLERANCE IN PLANTSROLE AND REGULATION OF SUCROSE-PHOSPHATE SYNTHASE IN HIGHER PLANTSTHE ORGANIZATION AND REGULATION OF PLANT GLYCOLYSISTHE CHLOROPHYLL-CAROTENOID PROTEINS OF OXYGENIC PHOTOSYNTHESIS14-3-3 PROTEINS AND SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONPHYSIOLOGY OF ION TRANSPORT ACROSS THE TONOPLAST OF HIGHER PLANTSTHE CHLOROPHYLL-CAROTENOID PROTEINS OF OXYGENIC PHOTOSYNTHESISBIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY OF WAX PRODUCTION IN PLANTSBIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY OF WAX PRODUCTION IN PLANTSBIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY OF WAX PRODUCTION IN PLANTSTHE FUNCTIONS AND REGULATION OF GLUTATHIONE S-TRANSFERASES IN PLANTSTHE CHLOROPHYLL-CAROTENOID PROTEINS OF OXYGENIC PHOTOSYNTHESISTHE QUALITY OF THE FOSSIL RECORD: Populations, Species, and CommunitiesImmunotoxins: An UpdateImmunotoxins: An UpdateMOLECULAR GENETICS OF HYPERTROPHIC CARDIOMYOPATHYMOLECULAR BIOLOGY OF DIABETES INSIPIDUSMOLECULAR BIOLOGY OF DIABETES INSIPIDUSREDUCED-SIZE HEPATIC ALLOGRAFTSMINIMALLY INVASIVE SURGERYXENOTRANSPLANTATIONCELLULAR AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY OF ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE AND ANIMAL MODELSMALE SEX DETERMINATION: Current Concepts of Male Sexual DifferentiationMOLECULAR EVENTS IN THE PATHOGENESIS OF HEPADNAVIRUS-ASSOCIATED HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMAMETABOLIC INTERACTIONS OF DIABETES AND PREGNANCYMOLECULAR EVENTS IN THE PATHOGENESIS OF HEPADNAVIRUS-ASSOCIATED HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMAMALE SEX DETERMINATION: Current Concepts of Male Sexual DifferentiationHYPERCALCEMIA OF MALIGNANCY: The Central Role of Parathyroid Hormone-Related ProteinThe Regulator of G Protein Signaling FamilyGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsThe Regulator of G Protein Signaling FamilyMore AR articles citing this referenceFootnotes:1The Annual Review of biochemistry is online athttp://biochem.annualreviews.orgFigure 1Palmitate turnover on Gαand GPCR is regulated during the G-protein activation cycle.
Figure Locations...The cycle of palmitate turnover on a GPCR and heterotrimeric G protein in response to pathway activation is illustrated in Figure 1....
TABLE 1Palmitoylation motifsaS-palmitoylated cysteines are underlined and in boldface type (C). The superscript numbers refer to the amino acid position in the protein sequence. Amino acid sequences are human unless indicated otherwise. Abbreviations used are farn, farnesyl isoprenoid; gg, geranylgeranyl isoprenoid. Modified with permission from Biochemistry (6). Copyright (2003) American Chemical Society.
Most Downloaded from this journalThe Hippo Pathway: Biology and PathophysiologyShenghong Ma, Zhipeng Meng, Rui Chen, Kun-Liang GuanVol. 88, 2019AbstractThe Hippo pathway was initially discovered in Drosophila melanogaster as a key regulator of tissue growth. It is an evolutionarily conserved signaling cascade regulating numerous biological processes, including cell growth and fate decision, organ size ...
Read MoreFigure 1: Core components of the Hippo pathway in mammalian cells. The Hippo pathway activity controls the dynamic localization of YAP/TAZ between nucleus and cytoplasm. (a) When the Hippo pathway is ...
Figure 2: Mechanical cues regulate YAP/TAZ activities through Rho GTPase and the Hippo pathway. Cell–cell contact, cell stretching, cell tension, extracellular matrix (ECM) stiffness, and changes in c...
Figure 3: The Hippo pathway integrates multiple signals to regulate the activity of YAP/TAZ. The LATS kinase activity is controlled by cell polarity and cell adhesion through KIBRA/NF2, tight junction...
Figure 4: YAP/TAZ and cancer hallmarks. The Hippo pathway effectors YAP/TAZ directly or indirectly control multiple cancer hallmarks, including proliferation, survival, evading growth suppressors, rep...
CRISPR/Cas9 in Genome Editing and BeyondHaifeng Wang, Marie La Russa, Lei S. QiVol. 85, 2016AbstractThe Cas9 protein (CRISPR-associated protein 9), derived from type II CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats) bacterial immune systems, is emerging as a powerful tool for engineering the genome in diverse organisms. As an RNA-...
Read MoreFigure 1: CRISPR-associated protein 9 (Cas9)-mediated sequence-specific genomic editing. (a) Comparison of programmable sequence-specific genome editing nucleases. (Top) Zinc-finger nucleases (ZFNs) a...
Figure 2: Nuclease-deactivated Cas9 (dCas9)-mediated sequence-specific gene regulation. (a) CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) strategies. Repression can occur with dCas9 alone in bacteria, which stericall...
Figure 3: Applications of CRISPR-associated protein 9 (Cas9) in gene editing, gene regulation, epigenome editing, and genomic imaging. (a) Cas9-mediated site-specific genome editing has a variety of a...
Mitochondrial Machineries for Protein Import and AssemblyNils Wiedemann and Nikolaus PfannerVol. 86, 2017AbstractMitochondria are essential organelles with numerous functions in cellular metabolism and homeostasis. Most of the >1,000 different mitochondrial proteins are synthesized as precursors in the cytosol and are imported into mitochondria by five transport ...
Read MoreFigure 1: Overview of the five major protein import pathways of mitochondria. Presequence-carrying preproteins are imported by the translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane (TOM) and the presequ...
Figure 2: The presequence pathway into the mitochondrial inner membrane (IM) and matrix. The translocase of the outer membrane (TOM) consists of three receptor proteins, the channel-forming protein To...
Figure 3: Role of the oxidase assembly (OXA) translocase in protein sorting. Proteins synthesized by mitochondrial ribosomes are exported into the inner membrane (IM) by the OXA translocase; the ribos...
Figure 4: Carrier pathway into the inner membrane. The precursors of the hydrophobic metabolite carriers are synthesized without a cleavable presequence. The precursors are bound to cytosolic chaperon...
Figure 5: Mitochondrial intermembrane space import and assembly (MIA) machinery. Many intermembrane space (IMS) proteins contain characteristic cysteine motifs. The precursors are kept in a reduced an...
Figure 6: Biogenesis of β-barrel proteins of the outer mitochondrial membrane. The precursors of β-barrel proteins are initially imported by the translocase of the outer membrane (TOM), bind to small ...
Figure 7: The dual role of mitochondrial distribution and morphology protein 10 (Mdm10) in protein assembly and organelle contact sites. Mdm10 associates with the sorting and assembly machinery (SAM) ...
Figure 8: Multiple import pathways for integral α-helical proteins of the mitochondrial outer membrane. The precursors of proteins with an N-terminal signal anchor sequence are typically inserted into...
Figure 9: The mitochondrial contact site and cristae organizing system (MICOS) interacts with protein translocases. MICOS consists of two core subunits, Mic10 and Mic60. Mic10 forms large oligomers th...
ExosomesD. Michiel Pegtel and Stephen J. GouldVol. 88, 2019AbstractExosomes are small, single-membrane, secreted organelles of ∼30 to ∼200 nm in diameter that have the same topology as the cell and are enriched in selected proteins, lipids, nucleic acids, and glycoconjugates. Exosomes contain an array of membrane-...
Read MoreFigure 1: Exosomes are heterogeneous in size, heterogeneous in composition, and enriched in membrane-associated, high-order oligomeric protein complexes. Although it is likely that no exosome contains...
Figure 2: Exosomes bud from endosome and plasma membranes. Exosome biogenesis occurs by three modes: () vesicle budding into discrete endosomes that mature into multivesicular bodies, which release ex...
THE GREEN FLUORESCENT PROTEINRoger Y. TsienVol. 67, 1998AbstractIn just three years, the green fluorescent protein (GFP) from the jellyfish Aequorea victoria has vaulted from obscurity to become one of the most widely studied and exploited proteins in biochemistry and cell biology. Its amazing ability to generate a ...
Read MoreFigure 1: GFP sequences. (Line 1) The wild-type (WT) gfp10 gene as originally cloned and sequenced by Prasher et al (10). (Line 2) A popular humanized version (EGFP, Clontech Laboratories, Palo Alto,...
Figure 2: Mechanism proposed by Cubitt et al (22) for the intramolecular biosynthesis of the GFP chromophore, with rate constants estimated for the Ser65 → Thr mutant by Reid & Flynn (23) and Heim et...
Figure 3: Stereoview of the three-dimensional structure of GFP (30), showing 11 β-strands forming a hollow cylinder through which is threaded a helix bearing the chromophore, shown in ball-and-stick ...
Figure 4: Amino acid side chains, main chain carbonyls and amides, and solvent waters in the immediate vicinity of the chromophore of S65T GFP (30). Side chains are labeled with the one-letter code f...
Figure 5: Fluorescence excitation and emission spectra (solid and dashed lines, respectively) for typical members of the six major classes of GFP mutants, together with the chromophore structures bel...
Figure 6: Location on the GFP crystal structure (30) of the most important sites that improve folding at 37°C. The amino acids shown in space-filling representation are the wild-type residues that ar...
