old id = 1742
Clinical Trials Research | NEJM Evidence
2004
https://evidence.nejm.org

Login to your accountPrepare to become a physician, build your knowledge, lead a health care organization, and advance your career with NEJM Group information and services.
NEJM EvidenceNEW! A digital journal for innovative original research and fresh, bold ideas in clinical trial design and clinical decision-making.
NEJM CatalystNEW! Peer-reviewed journal featuring in-depth articles to accelerate the transformation of health care delivery.
NEJM Journal WatchConcise summaries and expert physician commentary that busy clinicians need to enhance patient care.
NEJM Knowledge+The most effective and engaging way for clinicians to learn, improve their practice, and prepare for board exams.
NEJM Resident 360Information, resources, and support needed to approach rotations - and life as a resident.
NEJM HealerThe most advanced way to teach, practice, and assess clinical reasoning skills.
NEJM 医学前沿The authorized source of trusted medical research and education for the Chinese-language medical community.
NEJM Career CenterValuable tools for building a rewarding career in health care.
NEJM Library HubInformation and tools for librarians about site license offerings.
The New England Journal of MedicineThe most trusted, influential source of new medical knowledge and clinical best practices in the world.
Stay connected to the evidence that shapes medicine today and informs practice tomorrowMake clinical decisions based on evidence, not on convention.
INSTITUTIONAL REMOTE ACCESSNEJM Evidence.
A new digital journal.
Sign up for This Week Email NewsletterRequest institutional accessWatch video from EditorsAI Estimation of Gestational Age from Blind Ultrasound Sweeps in Low-Resource SettingsFetal biometry is used to estimate gestational age in high-resource settings, but personnel requirements and equipment cost limit its use in low-resource settings. Untrained personnel performed ultrasound “sweeps” of the gravid abdomen using low-cost ultrasound equipment. Artificial intelligence–assisted image analysis yielded results similar to those acquired with biometry.
The Basics of Machine LearningWhen a person is pregnant, a key question is how to establish the “date” of the pregnancy. Classically, the date was based on the last menstrual period (LMP). For the past 3 decades or more, in high-resource countries, this has been done using “hospital-grade” ultrasound machines, with testing performed by trained sonographers. In many parts of the world, neither the machines nor the trained sonographers are accessible. In an article published in NEJM Evidence, Pokaprakarn et al.
1asked whether a low-cost handheld ultrasound device combined with artificial intelligence (AI) could substitute for the expensive machines and trained sonographers.
Leveraging Artificial Intelligence to Improve Pregnancy Dating in Low-Resource SettingsFor practicing obstetricians and pediatricians, accurate gestational age (GA) is a cornerstone of quality care during pregnancy and the newborn period. GA determines prenatal management decisions, such as eligibility for antenatal glucocorticoids if preterm delivery is anticipated or timing of delivery in complicated pregnancies to avoid stillbirth or maternal morbidity. Knowledge of GA for women in labor also allows for transfer to facilities capable of handling preterm infants and guides postnatal resuscitation practices and specialized newborn care.
MultimediaThe Case of the Missing DataEfficacy of Single-Dose Human Papillomavirus Vaccination among Young African WomenEffective single-dose HPV vaccination may simplify implementation and decrease costs. This trial compared single-dose nonavalent or bivalent HPV vaccination to meningococcal vaccination among 2275 Kenyan women 15 to 20 years of age. Vaccine efficacy was 97.5% for both nonavalent and bivalent HPV vaccination, with an SAE rate of 4.5% to 5.2% by group.
Ethical Challenges to Improving Access to Human Papillomavirus Vaccines in Low- and Middle-Income CountriesCervical cancer burden in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) remains a true public health problem of substantial proportions; of the estimated 342,000 deaths attributable to cervical cancer in 2020, 90% occurred in LMICs.
1Immunization against human papilloma virus (HPV) is a powerful tool for primary prevention to reduce cervical cancer prevalence, morbidity, and mortality.
2Initially developed as a three-dose regimen of a bivalent vaccine providing protection against HPV-16 and HPV-18 (these two strains account for approximately 70% of cervical cancer burden), the quadrivalent and most recent nonavalent HPV vaccines provide protection against several additional HPV genotypes.
2Terminal Complement Inhibitor Ravulizumab in Generalized Myasthenia GravisIn this randomized controlled trial, ravulizumab provided rapid and efficacious treatment of adult patients with anti-acetylcholine reception antibody-positive generalized myasthenia gravis, as determined by both patient- and clinician-rated outcomes, with few adverse events.
Evaluation of Trends in Knee Arthroscopy from 2004 to 2019 in Ontario, CanadaThis study included 408,040 patients who underwent arthroscopy procedures in Ontario, Canada between 2004 and 2019. The number of procedures declined 8.9% from 24,070 in 2004/2005 to 21,930 in 2018/2019. Among patients with osteoarthritis, rates of progression to knee arthroplasty were 3.8%, 9.6% and 16.0% at 1, 2, and 5 years, respectively, compared with rates among patients with degenerative meniscal disorders, which were 1.6%, 4.1%, and 7.3%, at 1, 2 and 5 years, respectively.
TWEETS BY @nejmevidenceFeatured Articles Ahead of IssueHarm-to-Benefit of Three Decades of Prostate Cancer Screening in Black MenThe authors estimated prostate cancer overdiagnoses and overtreatment for all races and for Black men 50 to 84 years of age until 2016, by calculating the NND and NNT to prevent one prostate cancer death. Estimates incorporating a lag between incidence and mortality resulted in a NND and a NNT for Black men that were well into the low single digits.
E-Cigarette Use, Small Airway Fibrosis, and Constrictive BronchiolitisFour patients with chronic lung disease attributable to e-cigarette use had shortness of breath, chest pain, and mild progressive airway obstruction. Surgical lung biopsy showed small airway–centered fibrosis (constrictive bronchiolitis) and MUC5AC overexpression. Over 1 to 4 years, disease reversed partially, but not completely, for those who ceased vaping.
Fixed-Duration Ibrutinib-Venetoclax in Patients with Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia and ComorbiditiesAmong 211 patients with CLL who received ibrutinib-venetoclax or chlorambucil-obinutuzumab, there were 22 and 67 progression-free survival (PFS) events at a median follow-up of 27.7 months, respectively. PFS was significantly longer (P<0.001), and improvement with ibrutinib-venetoclax was consistent across subgroups. Adverse events (grade ≥3) were similar in both arms.
Stopping Trials Early Due to HarmDSMBs protect clinical trial participants from harm. We describe two trials stopped for potential harm to enrollees: a DSMB recommended termination soon after enrollment began when data showed higher mortality in the experimental versus the control arm, and a trial with completed enrollment was stopped while participants were being followed and treated.
A 54-Year-Old Woman with Cutaneous NodulesA 54-year-old woman presented with chronic cutaneous nodules and plaques. How do you approach the evaluation, and what is the diagnosis?Where the Rubber Meets the Road — Research in the AmazonMany patients who receive treatment for vivax malaria in the Americas present with recurrent infection within six months after completing treatment. This raises an important question: Does higher-dose primaquine work better than the treatment currently used in the Americas to prevent recurrences? This Clinical Trial Case Study describes the behind-the-scenes story of a randomized trial to evaluate antimalarial treatment efficacy in the Brazilian Amazon.
A 54-Year-Old Woman with Cutaneous NodulesA 54-year-old woman presented with chronic cutaneous nodules and plaques. How do you approach the evaluation, and what is the diagnosis?An essential resource for clinical evidence, trial design, and clinical decision-making.
BrowseResourcesAbout UsSubscriptionsstay connectedFollow UsJOURNALS
