old id = 477
The Technology 202: China is doing what the U.S. can’t seem to: regulate its tech giants - The Washington Post
2008
https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2021/07/28/technology-202-china-is-doing-what-us-cant-seem-regulate-its-tech-giants

The Technology 202: China is doing what the U.S. can’t seem to: regulate its tech giantswith Aaron SchafferWhile a slow-burning movement to rein in the U.S. tech industry plods through a gridlocked Congress and various agencies, China’s one-party government is acting swiftly—and harshly—to rein in its own tech titans.
This month alone, the country has instituted sweeping newprotections for gig workers; imposed newinteroperability requirementsfor online platforms;driven out cryptocurrency exchanges; barred itsleading ride-hailing app from app stores; and essentially banned the entire industry offor-profit online tutoring services.
Antitrust investigations and penaltieshave already targeted digital giants Alibaba and Tencent, among others, in recent months.
The shakeout continued Tuesday as Tencent’s WeChat, China’s dominant social and messaging platform,stopped registering new users, saying it needs to upgrade certain security systems to comply with unspecified“laws and regulations.
”The company expects registrations to resume in early August.
The WeChat news comes a day after Chinese regulators issued tough newworker protection rules for food delivery services, including industry leader Meituan, and weeks afterride-hailing giant Didi was removed from app storesas part of a cybersecurity investigation, widely viewed aspunishment for the company going public in the United States.
The government’s hard line has sentChinese tech stocks plummetingand rippled across the financial world. Shares of Chinese companies listed in the United States this week saw theirsteepest two-day drop since the 2008 financial crisis, according to BBC News.
Some observers see the moves as part of apolitical power playagainst an industry that has grown too wealthy, powerful and independent for the comfort of President Xi Jinping’s regime. In a Substack newsletter, economics commentator Noah Smith argued that it represents a broader shift in national priorities from consumer-facing online platforms and apps toharder, more cutting-edge tech, such as artificial intelligence and chip-making, that supports the country’s geopolitical objectives. There may be truth to both views.
But there’s another way of looking at these developments, in which China’s goals for its tech industry are not so different from those of its Western counterparts. It just has fewer checks and restraints on the use of state power to achieve them.
Rui Ma, an investor and analyst of China’s tech industry and founder ofTech Buzz China,the country isn’t “smashing its tech industry,” as Smith put it. Rather, thecrackdown shows that China’s government harbors many of the same concerns as tech critics in the United States and the European Union, and is intent on constructing the ground rules for an ever more digital economy.
Protections for gig workers in China, for example, followedyears of reportsof such workers being overworked, underpaid and abused byunaccountable management algorithms. The tightening of data security laws, focusing on firms with a significant presence outside China, mirrors U.S. fears about data privacy and spying, notably by Chinese firms such as Huawei andByteDance. The antitrust push draws on the arguments advanced by U.S. Federal Trade Commission Chair Lina Khan and others that dominant digital platforms lend themselves to new forms of monopolization and anticompetitive behavior.
“The headlines are virtually the same as what I read in the U.S.,” Rui said.
One big difference: Tech regulation in China faces fewer political hurdles than it does in the United States, where a gridlocked two-party Congress and intense lobbying by Silicon Valley firms have so far thwarted meaningful legislation. Despite broad agreement that tech giants are too powerful, both major U.S. parties are divided on how to address issues of competition, consumer protection and online speech.
Of course, China’s approach comes with its own big downsides: The lack of democratic process and transparent debate means its regulations can come across as arbitrary, vindictive and unpredictable—traits that tend tospook investors and risk chilling innovation.
There is one argument against U.S. regulation, however, that might be crumbling before our eyes: the specter of global domination by an unfettered ChineseInternetsector.
In congressional hearings and media interviews, U.S. tech executives haverepeatedly warnedthat onerous regulations, including new antitrust and privacy laws, wouldhamper their abilitytocompete with China’s tech gladiatorson the world stage. The implication, often unspoken butsometimes explicit, was that China understood that having powerful tech giants was in its national interest, and wouldn’t dare sacrifice that power in the name of values such as privacy, competition or consumer protection.
China does see value in its tech giants competing globally, Rui said, and the current regulatory wave is not a sign that it wants to destroy the industry’s ambitions abroad. But it does signal an abrupt end to the country’s hands-off approach to the tech sector, and demonstrates a new willingness to impose its own priorities—even at the cost of their profitability and international standing.
There’s been a narrative for years that the United States, the E.U. and China arecompeting in global“races”in realms such as artificial intelligence; Rui suggests China sees itself as racing to establish a world-class regulatory regime to guide the sector’s future.
“China wants to be world-leading in regulations,”Rui said.
“They don’t just want to follow the E.U. and the U.S.
”From itscensorship of the Internetto itssurveillance of vulnerable groups, many aspects of the Chinese government’s approach to are cautionary tales for the West.
But its aggressive stance toward anticompetitive practices, speculative and carbon-intensive cryptocurrencies, and gig worker exploitation aren’t necessarily the destructive moves they might seem to U.S. observers and investors. On the contrary, they may be laying the foundation for a more sustainable and vibrant ChineseInternetsector in the decades to come.
Federal Trade Commission chief technologist Erie Meyer said companies that “sacrifice security in service of speed” could face stronger enforcement, including subjecting them to “bans just like abusive debt collectors,” Protocol’s Ben Brodyreports. Meyer also slammed one-time penalties and suggested that the FTC needed to take on some industry business models.
“We’re going to make sure that data abusers face consequences for their wrongdoing,” she said. The comments came six weeks after President Bidenelevatedantitrust critic Lina Khan, known for herambitious agendato break up Big Tech, to lead the commission.
Top officials with the Justice Department, FBI, Secret Service and Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency said Congress should consider the requirements so that the U.S. government has a better idea of the cyberattacks companies are facing, Gerrit De Vynckreports. Many companies are reluctant to say they’ve been breached because it casts a shadow over their brands, ransomware negotiator Kurtis Minder said.
“The main concern would be reputational damage and loss of revenue as a result,” Minder said. “If the government made these disclosures — to the extent that a breach disclosure is not already required by law — confidential, it would help. Bonus would be if the government actively assisted in the recovery.”Investors in private equity firm Novalpina’s fund voted to take control this month, and the fund could be liquidated or handed over to a third party by Aug. 6, the Financial Times’s Kaye Wiggins and Anna Grossreport. The news comes as NSO Group is already struggling in the wake of reports byThe Washington Postand 16 media partners that its Pegasus spywaretargetedjournalists and human rights advocates.
The firm has reportedly grappled with an internalpower strugglefor months. The conflict isn’t related to the Pegasus Project investigation but could affect interest in owning the Israeli spyware company.
Novalpina did not respond to a request for comment from Sky News, which firstreportedon the development.
Israeli Defense Minister Benny Gantz is set to discuss the spyware reportsTuesdaywith his French counterpart, Reutersreports. French President Emmanuel Macron’s phone number was on a list of 50,000 phone numbers that included Pegasus targets, our colleaguesreported. NSO Grouphas repeatedlydisputedthe findings.
Instagram’snew restrictionson teens had some people skeptical. The New York Times’sShira Ovide:These policy changes to protect kids on Instagram seem thoughtful.
And as usual with Facebook, let's see how the policy changes are implemented.
https://t.co/6rSowNnhILThe Guardian’s Alex Hern:The thing I find most interesting about this change is that it requires Instagram to acknowledge that the previous approach was, in a small way, harmful. But how to acknowledge that it’s harmful for teens without admitting it may be harmful for adults?The New York Times’sCecilia Kang:Interesting. I remember having conversations about safety and security for youth on Insta and FB many years go. Was there a technological holdback then? Why now?Rising seas are coming for Big Tech campuses. Who will pay to protect them? (NPR)We reviewed 36 NDAs from major tech companies and discovered how far Silicon Valley's giants will go to silence and control their employees (Insider)Your Apple laptop is probably repaired at a facility workers say is a 'sweatshop' (Insider)Dating is tough. Could dressing up as a praying mantis help? (Lisa Bonos)Martin Shkreli had the only copy of a Wu-Tang Clan album. The U.S. government just sold it to cover his debt. (Sonia Rao)Today’s first@washingtonpostquarantine TikTok features the wave of Olympics updates this morninghttps://t.co/IS72IPjs8Jpic.twitter.com/BLMba41akq
