old id = 3931
It’s a Perfect Time for EVs. It’s a Terrible Time for EVs | WIRED
2008
https://www.wired.com/story/its-a-perfect-time-for-evs-its-a-terrible-time-for-evs

To revist this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
To revist this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
Aarian MarshallMatt SimonIt’s a Perfect Time for EVs. It’s a Terrible Time for EVsTo revist this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
To revist this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
Gas price graphslook like sheer cliffs. Employers are finally summoning white-collar workers back to their offices and their commutes. Nations all over the world have banned Russian gas and oil following the country’s invasion of Ukraine. Plus, theever-worsening climate crisisdemands that humanity keep every possible bit of carbon out of the atmosphere (and evenpull some out)—although transportation accounts for nearly a quarter of global emissions.
Gee, it sure would be a nice time to own anelectric vehicle.
A bunch of people apparently agree. The car-shopping company Edmundssaysthat searches for hybrids, plug-in hybrids, and battery electric vehicles jumped nearly 40 percent over the past month—up 18 percent in the first week of March alone. Environmentalistsandsecurity wonks are in. Last week, a senior attorney for the Natural Resources Defense Councilcalled for Americansto ditch their gas-powered rides, arguing, in a case that moved beyond this month’s terrifying events in Ukraine, that “drivers have been held hostage to the whims of petro-dictators for too long.” The Russian war has reinvigoratedCarter-era calls for “energy independence.”Too bad it’s a terrible time to buy a car—especially an electric one. Pandemic supply chain woes, production crunches, and congressional waffling about the future of electric subsidies have crashed into new challenges tied to theeconomic sanctions of Russia. “We don't have enough batteries and auto manufacturing capacity to meet the demand for electric vehicles today, which is missing a prime opportunity,” says environmental economist Mark Paul of the New College of Florida. Plus, for the people most pinched by the rising cost of gas, going electric likely remains out of reach. The average transaction price for a new EV was $60,054 in February, almost $15,000 higher than the one for all new vehicles,according toEdmunds.
Gas prices were already inching skyward in the US thanks to increasing demand, brought on by the country’s “post”-Covidrecovery. Meanwhile, the nations that control global oil and gas supplies hadn’t yet ramped up the production they cut during the depths of the pandemic. Then Russia invaded Ukraine. Global sanctions on Russian industry have put enormous pressure on the petroleum market, pushing up prices everywhere. The US gets just a small slice of its oil and gas from Russia, but still, the national average retail price for gasoline hit $4.33 per gallon on Monday, accordingto the American Automobile Association, and $5.74 in California—highs that haven’t been seen since the 2008 recession.
But the same calamities that have upended the gasoline market have upended the auto world, too. Demand forsemiconductorswas already climbing before the pandemic, as silicon chips are now stuffed into an increasingly dizzying array of products: toys, light bulbs, industrial machines. The auto industry is no exception. Even the most basic new gas-powered car might require 100 chips to power its engine, safety, and infotainment systems; advanced EVs can have more than 1,000. Butsupply shocks owing to the global reach of Covid-19made it even harder for automakers to find the chips that make their cars go. Now, analysts project the crunch will get even worse because Ukraine is amajor producer of neon gas, which semiconductor makers use to power the lasers that write on computer chips. Experts say efforts to ramp up chip production in the US won’t bear fruit for years.
Largely because of the chip crunch, US sales of vehicles may hit only 15 million this year, 2 million below a normal production year, says Warren Browne, an automotive veteran who now runs his own supplier consultancy. “The chip shortage overwhelms everything,” he says.
That shortage is tied to inflation, too, which is up economy-wide in the US by 7.9 percent compared to last year. The higher prices automakers are paying for parts will likely be pushed on to customers, Browne says—which could mean cars won’t get cheaper anytime soon.
The Russian invasion of Ukraine has sent other parts of the automotive supply chain into a scramble. Russia is a major producer of nickel—a key component of electric vehicle batteries that isset to become even more importantas automakers seek to extend high-end vehicles’ranges between charges. Though imports of Russian nickel haven’t technically been prohibited by sanctions, the conflict has spiked the global price of the raw material. This may be because companies are worried about the reputational risk of dealing with Russian firms, says Eddie Fishman, a former State Department official who now teaches about sanctions at Columbia University. “It doesn't surprise me that there are knock-on effects,” he says.
Additionally, in the US, federal debates over whether to further subsidize the sales of electric vehicles—and how—has created industry-wide uncertainty. The Build Back Better bill, a companion to last year’sinfrastructure legislation, could make it much easier for people to buy expensive, new EVs with tax credits of up to $12,500. But the bill is stuck in the Senate, and its future is a big question mark.
The EV crunch has landed at a terrible time, but even if the country had fleets of them rolling off assembly lines, a lot of people still wouldn't be ready to adopt, says Zeke Hausfather, director of climate and energy at the Breakthrough Institute, which advocates for climate action. Americans keep their cars for 15 or 20 years. “Even if you were to wave a magic wand and ban gas cars being purchased in the country from today forward, it would still take around 15 years for the entire fleet to be converted into electric,” he says.
In an ideal world, we would have started the transition decades ago, because it takes time for the market to adjust. In the world we’re stuck with, the Biden administration isaiming for at least 40 percent of vehicles sold in 2030to be electric. That goal came too late to assuage the current confluence of crises, but at least it’d help get the market moving. “I think what all these prices are showing us is that the market can't reorient itself on a dime, the way that economists often assume it can in their models,” Paul says. “The reality is just far more complicated than that.”More From WIREDContact© 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of ourUser AgreementandPrivacy Policy and Cookie StatementandYour California Privacy Rights.
Wiredmay earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
Ad Choices
