old id = 95
Met @ MIT | MIT Technology Review
1997
https://www.technologyreview.com/2022/04/27/1048513/met-mit

Met @ MITIt’s not uncommon for MIT alumni to maintain strong relationships after graduation. For many, the people they meet at the Institute become lifelong best friends, business partners, or even spouses. Enjoy these stories of couples who met at MIT.
Daniel Fitzgerald, SM ’17, and Manisha Mohan, SM ’17“At MIT we did many projects, courses, and hackathons together (and some publications), and after graduating we’ve continued going on adventures and sharing cultures,” says Fitzgerald, who met his wife at a get-to-know-each-other activity for incoming Media Lab students; they married in 2019. “We continue to work on projects together and brainstorm ‘antidisciplinary’ ideas that only Media Lab alumni would understand.”Professor Kristala L. Jones Prather ’94 and Darcy Prather ’91“He knew who I was before I knew who he was, because he was part of this group of older students in the local National Society of Black Engineers chapter who would look to freshmen … to identify individuals who would be able to continue what they had started,” recalls Jones Prather. “Darcy was somebody that everybody in the community knew … we lived in the same dorm … so we at least had the same community of people we interacted with … I knew who he was, of course, but never at all imagined that we’d be sitting here 25 years later.”Richard Chleboski ’87 and Grace Ueng ’87“Grace and I met as freshmen when Grace came to visit Bill Mayweather ’86, SM ’87, her high school friend and my fraternity brother. While we never dated in school, I once gave her a rose (from a dozen I was giving to my then girlfriend) when I saw her walking to class … Fast-forward to our 30th reunion … Grace and I enjoyed dinner, attended the Pops, and even had dessert afterwards … I surprised her with 11 roses with a note saying, ‘Here are the other 11 roses I should have given you 30 years ago.’”Myra Brigid O’Donoghue, PhD ’98, and Karen Totland, former postdoc“We became fast friends, and ultimately became a couple in 1997 after Karen had left MIT,” says O’Donoghue, recalling a fun Sunday in the lab when the pair found themselves waiting for the catalyst to regenerate in their dry box. “We decided to ‘decorate’ the underside of the box using a Sharpie. When we went back to MIT in 2006 for the symposium in honor of [Richard R. Schrock’s] Nobel Prize, we searched his labs and located our old dry box. Our drawings and signatures were still there!”Dave Cooke ’83 and Sara (Keagle) Cooke ’85; and Wilhelmina “Mina” (Park) Fader ’85 and Peter Fader ’83, SM ’85, PhD ’87“In August 1981, my roommate (Dave Cooke ’83) and I met our new neighbors (then Mina Park ’85 and Sara Keagle ’85), a pair of freshmen who were moving into Baker House, right across the hall from us,” says Peter Fader. “It was quite a match—actually a pair of matches. Within a couple of months of their graduation in 1985, Sara was married to Dave, and Mina was married to me.”Did you and your partner meet at MIT? Share your story and submit photos here:https://alum.mit.edu/valentines-day-mit.
byMIT News StaffShareThis story was part of our May/June 2022 issue.
PopularKeep ReadingMost PopularWhy China is still obsessed with disinfecting everythingMost public health bodies dealing with covid have long since moved on from the idea of surface transmission. China’s didn’t—and that helps it control the narrative about the disease’s origins and danger.
These materials were meant to revolutionize the solar industry. Why hasn’t it happened?Perovskites are promising, but real-world conditions have held them back.
Anti-aging drugs are being tested as a way to treat covidDrugs that rejuvenate our immune systems and make us biologically younger could help protect us from the disease’s worst effects.
A quick guide to the most important AI law you’ve never heard ofThe European Union is planning new legislation aimed at curbing the worst harms associated with artificial intelligence.
Stay connectedGet the latest updates fromMIT Technology ReviewDiscover special offers, top stories, upcoming events, and more.
Thank you for submitting your email!It looks like something went wrong.
We’re having trouble saving your preferences. Try refreshing this page and updating them one more time. If you continue to get this message, reach out to us atcustomer-service@technologyreview.comwith a list of newsletters you’d like to receive.
MIT Technology ReviewOur in-depth reporting reveals what’s going on now to prepare you for what’s coming next.
Subscribeto support our journalism.
AboutHelp© 2022 MIT Technology Review
