old id = 36
9 Best Cheap Smartphones for 2022 (iPhone, Android) | WIRED
2019
https://www.wired.com/story/best-cheap-phones

To revist this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
To revist this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
Julian ChokkattuThe Best Cheap Phones for Almost Every BudgetTo revist this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
To revist this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
wireless carriers goout of their way to make expensive smartphones seem affordable. You may wonder why you shouldn't buy aSamsung Galaxy S22 Ultraif you have to pay nothing down and only $33 a month for it. The answer is that over 36 monthly installments, you’re still spending more than a thousand dollars on a phone. On top of which, your pricey device may also keep you locked to the network, leaving you unable to switch wireless carriers until the phone is paid off.
Forget the spendy option and instead get a seriously great, more affordable smartphone. We’ve tested dozens to find the best cheap smartphones that aren't annoyingly slow. Our top pick, theGoogle Pixel 5A, is as good as almost any device, and our other choices strike a great balance between price and luxury.
Be sure to check out our manyother guides, including theBest Android Phones,Best Phones With a Headphone Jack,Best Google Pixel, andBest iPhones.
Updated April 2022: We've added the Samsung Galaxy A53 5G and iPhone 11.
Special offer for Gear readers: Get a1-year subscription toWIREDfor $5 ($25 off). This includes unlimited access toWIRED.
com and our print magazine (if you'd like). Subscriptions help fund the work we do every day.
If you buy something using links in our stories, we may earn a commission. This helps support our journalism.
Learn more.
Photograph: GoogleGoogle Pixel 5AThe Google Pixel 5A 5G (9/10, WIRED Recommends) is the best smartphone for most people. For $449, it has one of the best camera systems you'll find in its price bracket. The main camera snaps delightfully crisp and well-exposed photos, and the ultrawide captures sweeping scenes. Put the phone on a tripod and point it at the sky and you can turn into a burgeoning astrophotographer too. In this arena, it handily leads its peers.
But cameras aren't everything. This Pixel excels in performance, with its Qualcomm Snapdragon 765G processor and 6 gigs of RAM (the same chip as 2020'sPixel 5). It's smooth enough for most everyday tasks. You can even play demanding games likeGenshin Impact, though only at low graphics and with some stutters. The OLED screen is not super common on sub-$500 phones; it's colorful, bright enough to see in broad daylight, and has deep blacks for excellent contrast.
Best of all is the 4,680-mAh battery, which comfortably lasts almost two full days before you need to plug it in. You'll get three years of OS and security upgrades, which is more than most other affordable phones (save Samsung devices). Other extras include IP67 water resistance,sub-6 5G connectivity, NFC for contactless payments, a headphone jack, and a rear fingerprint sensor. There's sadly no MicroSD card slot, so you'll have to make do with the included 128 GB.
The best part of Pixel phones is the software experience. There are plenty of smart features you won't find on comparable phones that you'll use every day. For example,Call Screenwill monitor potential spam or robocalls so you don't even have to say “hello.” Now Playing identifies music in your surroundings, like the coffee shop, so you'll have the answer to who's playing before you even search for it. You can read more about all the other software perks available inPixel phones here.
It's not all rosy. Unlike previous years, when you could choose between a small and large Pixel, the Pixel 5A comes in just one size because ofsupply chain constraints. Its 6.3-inch screen certifies it as a Big Phone, which is a shame if you liked its compact predecessor, thePixel 4A. Worse yet, the 5A is available only in the US and Japan. If you can wait, Google is expected to announce thePixel 6Aat its upcoming developer conference in May.
Works on all three major US carriers.
Samsung Galaxy A53 5GThe Samsung Galaxy A53 5G (8/10, WIRED Recommends) is a great alternative to the Pixel. Its camera system isn't quite as nice, but it comes close; battery life doesn't hit two days, but it comes close; performance isn't as smooth, but it comes close. Notice a theme? Itdoeshave a brighter,120-Hz screenthat's easy to view in daylight, andthe A53even bests the Pixel in software updates, with four OS upgrades and five years of security updates.
Photograph: AppleApple iPhone SE (2022)Want an iPhone for not a lot of money? The third-generation iPhone SE (7/10, WIRED Recommends) is the way to go. It doesn't change much externally fromits predecessor—you still get a 4.7-inch LCD screen that feels cramped to type on with thick bezels on the top and bottom. Itlooksold, but maybe you like that; it's the only iPhone Apple sells with a home button and Touch ID.
Apple stuffed the same chip that powers its flagshipiPhone 13 range, the A15 Bionic, into the iPhone SE 2022, meaning this is one of the most powerful sub-$500 smartphones around. It can handle anything you throw at it. This chip also improves battery life, but this tiny phone will still last only about a day, maybe less if you use it a lot. There's sub-6 5G support too, and it remains one of the few smartphones at this price with wireless charging.
The lone camera on the back takes great photos during the day and handles high-contrast scenes well, but unfortunately, Applestilldidn't include Night mode, available on its pricier iPhones. That means in low light you can expect muddy, grainy, and blurry shots. They just don't hold a candle to what you'll capture on the Pixel 5A 5G.
At the very least, this iPhone will last a long time, as Apple supports its devices foryears.
I'd recommend slapping a case on the glass back and a screen protector on the front to keep it looking fresh—our favoriteiPhone SE accessoriescan help.
Works on all three major US carriers.
Apple iPhone 11For not much more, you can upgrade to the iPhone 11 (8/10, WIRED Recommends). It's Apple's flagship iPhone from 2019 and the first to introduce Night mode, so it can capture nice photos in low light. It has the newer design, with slimmer bezels, a larger screen, and Face ID instead of Touch ID (though no 5G). It's not as speedy as the iPhone SE, but it can handle the same apps and games just fine.
Photograph: SamsungSamsung Galaxy A32 5GIf you don't want to spend a dollar more than $300, snag Samsung's Galaxy A32 5G (8/10, WIRED Recommends). Despite the plasticky build, it's a renaissance Android phoneandit costs just $280 (frequently less). The MediaTek Dimensity 720 5G chip powering it offers smooth performance; it ran games likeDead Cellswith barely a hiccup. And as the name suggests, there's 5G on this phone—robust sub-6 5G that works on all major carriers, with support for the C-band spectrum that improves 5G on carriers like AT&T and Verizon.
The 6.5-inch screen isn't an OLED panel like on the Pixel 5A, but LCD instead. It does have a perk though: a90-Hz screen refresh rate. It increases the number of times per second that images refresh on the screen from 60 to 90, giving you a smoother experience. It's a small but nice upgrade. The battery life is even better. The 5,000-mAh cell lasts two full days on a single charge, so you don't need to plug in every night.
The main 48-megapixel camera on the back of the A32 5G is surprisingly great, managing to capture a lot of detail without overexposing the image. As is the case with most Samsung phones, it tends to strip out shadows too much and oversaturates a bit, but this is still a reliable shooter, even at night, with the dedicated Night mode.
Samsung retains all the little things you want in a phone, like a headphone jack, a MicroSD card slot, NFC for contactless payments, and a side-mounted fingerprint sensor. Best of all, it promises to deliver two OS upgrades to this device and up to four years of security updates. That kind of software support is very rare on a phone this affordable. There's no successor to this 2021 phone just yet. It's harder to find, but it's still a great buy.
Works on all three major carriers.
Moto G Stylus 2022TheMoto G Stylus 2022is a perfectly fine phone, as I notedin my review, but it's not an upgrade over its predecessor in any way. Performance is a little worse than before, there's still no NFC to make contactless payments, and there's no 5G support. Still, it performs well enough to run most apps and games, you get nearly two-day battery life, and it will get three years of security updates (but one OS upgrade).
Photograph: MotorolaMotorola Moto G Power (2021)Want the longest possible battery life? Two days is pretty great from the Pixel 5A or Galaxy A32 5G above, but Motorola'sMoto G Power (2021)can last around three full days on a single charge thanks to its 5,000-mAh battery. It used to retail for $250 but is now almost always $180, which makes it an even better value.
The Snapdragon 662 chip inside with 4 gigs of RAM is perfectly adequate; you'll be able to run all your apps and most games just fine. The 720p LCD display isn't as nice as our other picks, but it still gets bright enough to see it in sunny conditions outdoors. Similarly, the rear camera system fares well during the day, but it's not as good as the A32 5G or Pixel 5A in low light.
It only comes with 64 gigabytes of storage, so you'll want to make use of the MicroSD card to add more space. There's a headphone jack and a fingerprint sensor too, but no NFC. That means you can't use this phone to make contactless payments with services like Google Pay. Thebiggest downside? Motorola only offers two years of security updates and one OS upgrade (to Android 11).
You might be wondering why I didn't recommend the newerMoto G Power 2022. That's because after running benchmark tests, I confirmed my suspicions that performance onthe newer handsetis markedly worse than the 2021 version (Motorola switched to a lesser Mediatek chipset). It'sverysluggish, and the results from the camera also felt like a downgrade. Itdoeslast three full days, but as long as the 2021 Moto G Power is still available, I think it's a better buy.
Works on all three major US carriers.
Photograph: TCLTCL 20 Pro 5GThere are technically three phones in TCL's 2021 smartphone lineup: theTCL 20 Pro 5G ($500), TCL 20S ($250), and TCL 20 SE ($190). We're omitting the latter two here because any of the other sub-$300 or $200 phones above are better choices. But there are good reasons to go for the TCL 20 Pro 5G.
It has the same Qualcomm Snapdragon 750G chip as theGalaxy A52 5Gwe tested last year, but its performance is a little smoother. It's powerful, and it's easily thenicestand most luxurious-feeling device as well. It has an aluminum frame and glass on both sides, though that makes it more fragile. It's also the only Android phone here withwireless charging support.
The 6.67-inch AMOLED screen is colorful, and it gets bright enough to see outdoors. The 4,500-mAh battery cell comfortably lasts for more than a full day of use, and it has the usual niceties, like NFC, a headphone jack, and a MicroSD card slot. The only reason it's not our top pick is that TCL only promises two OS upgrades and two years of security updates, so the Google and Samsung phones above will be supported for a longer time. It also supports 5G but not on AT&T (4G LTE still works), and there's no IP rating for water resistance. It has a pretty good camera system, but it's notasgood as the aforementioned competitors.
That said, TCL's 30 series successors, announced atMWC 2022, are expected to arrive soon. If you are not in a rush to upgrade your phone, it's worth waiting.
Works on all three major US carriers (5G does not work on AT&T).
Motorola One 5G AceThis Motorola phone is rare. Unlike its Moto G siblings, it has an NFC chip so it can make contactless payments via Google Pay—handy when you forgot your wallet at home. It has two-day battery life, sub-6 5G connectivity, and pretty solid performance. Don't expect much from the cameras, but if you don't care about 'em or about software updates much, this will surely satisfy. Try not to pay more than $300.
We tested Motorola'sMoto G Power 2022andMoto G Purebut don't recommend them here because the 2021 Moto G Power trounces them in every wayandcosts nearly the same (if not less). It's a similar story with HMD'sNokia G50. It's afinephone, but it misses many features you'll find on other $300 phones, including the Galaxy A32 5G.
It depends. We're happy with the picks we have in our guide right now. However, the Google Pixel 6A will likely be announced in May, and if the past is any indication, it might become our new favorite cheap phone. It's worth waiting for it if your budget can stretch to a little less than $500. Then there are new TCL, OnePlus, and Nokia phones coming in the next few months (as well the new Moto G Stylus 5G 2022 ($500) and Moto G 5G 2022 ($400) Motorola just announced). If you can't wait, go with one of the options above. If you can, you might have newer options come May or June.
If none of these phones have the features you want or they aren't as powerful as you like, your best option is to look for last year's flagship smartphones, which might be steeply discounted. Sometimes they're easy to find, but some manufacturers stop selling them altogether (the 2021Samsung Galaxy S21 serieswill soon disappear). Keep in mind that you'll lose a year of software support.
If you buy an unlocked phone on this list and try to take it to one of your wireless carrier's retail stores, they may tell you it isn't compatible with the network. It likely is. Just use a paper clip or SIM ejection tool to pop the SIM card out of your current phone, then slide that SIM into your new phone. If it doesn't work at first, reboot the phone or wait a couple of hours.
If you need a new SIM, try ordering one online from your carrier or try to get them to give you a SIM when you activate a line in the store (if you're starting coverage). Tell them you have a phone. Many times, reps will want to sell you a phone; that's one potential reason they might hassle you into buying a different device in the store.
Having said that, please make sure whatever phone you buy will work on your wireless network. Listings on retailers like Amazon should state clearly which networks a device will be compatible with. Also, make sure the listing says that the phone is being sold "unlocked."Warning for Verizon users:There's a higher chance an unlocked phone will not work on your network. Make sure it is labeled to work on Verizon, or that it says the phone is CDMA-capable. If something strange is going on, like you don't get any texts, you may also need to contact customer service and ask them to enable CDMA-less roaming. AT&T and T-Mobile are GSM carriers, which is the standard for most of the world; most unlocked phones are compatible with them.
If you're nervous, look up the specifications of the exact model you're considering. Make sure it has the LTE or 5G bands it needs to run on your carrier. Speaking of networks, you don't need to rush out and buy a 5G phone. Most of our picks support the new network, but 5G is still sparse in the US and not much faster than LTE.
If a phone isn't listed here, or if it's refurbished, be careful. It's easy to waste money or time when you're shopping for affordable phones. It's hard to get a sense of how a cheaper phone will act in the long term from using it in a store for five minutes, and retail employees may not be much help. Make sure you read reviews online. A good rule of thumb is to avoid most devices that originally came out before 2020. They probably won't continue to get software and security updates for long, if they're even being supported now.
WIRED COUPONSExtra 20% off sitewide - Dyson promo code 2022GoPro Hot Deal: $150 off the new HERO10 Black BonesSamsung coupon - 45% off select items + free shippingExtra $100 off XPS & Inspiron laptops, desktops & 2 in 1s with Dell coupon codeDeal of the Day: 1-day flash sale for 20% off electronics & appliancesAT&T Internet promo code - $50 reward with AT&T Fiber orderMore From WIREDContact© 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of ourUser AgreementandPrivacy Policy and Cookie StatementandYour California Privacy Rights.
Wiredmay earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
Ad Choices
