old id = 223
social construction of the space race: then and now | International Affairs | Oxford Academic
2019
https://doi.org/10.1093/ia/iiz190

Article ContentsThe social construction of the space race: then and nowThe author would like to thank Justin Haner for his valuable research assistance, NASA archivist Elizabeth Sukow, as well as Robert Cross, Marianne Riddervold, Kristi Govella, Julie Klinger, Pernille Rieker and three anonymous reviewers for their feedback.
CiteMai'a K. Davis Cross, The social construction of the space race: then and now,International Affairs, Volume 95, Issue 6, November 2019, Pages 1403–1421,https://doi.org/10.1093/ia/iiz190AbstractThe proposed creation of a US Space Force has led to a ratcheting up of a sense of competition and threat among spacefaring powers. Many top government officials and experts around the world believe that space will inevitably become the next battlefield, either among countries, or private companies, or both. India successfully blew up a satellite, China landed a probe on the dark side of the moon and many other countries have rapidly developed launch capabilities. The term ‘Space Race 2.0’ is increasingly invoked. But are we in the midst of a new space race, or on the verge of a new space age? This article argues that despite many governmental efforts to militarize space over the past 70 years, on the whole, non-state actors have ensured that space has been a highly cooperative realm of human interaction, even during the height of the Cold War. While on the surface there has been a narrative of threat-based competition, the author argues that this has largely been socially constructed. Drawing upon fresh archival research and participant observation, the author provides the historical context for understanding the increasingly diverse field of space actors today.
Fifty years after the first moon landing, human activity in space is undergoing quantitative and qualitative expansion on a vast scale. Seventy-two countries have space programmes, fourteen have launch capability and five (China, India, Japan, the United States and Russia), plus the EU, have highly developed space capabilities. Seventy countries have at least one satellite in orbit, and provision by private companies of a wide range of space-related products and services has grown exponentially. The landscape of actors involved in space is becoming increasingly diverse, including space agencies, private commercial entities, international organizations, amateur space enthusiasts, multinational corporations and public–private partnerships, among others. Experts are actively working on plans to set up a permanent human presence on the moon within a few short years and sending humans to Mars possibly by 2033. Collectively, governments now spend over US$80 billion annually on space programmes, and the total global space economy, including private companies, is worth over US$387 billion.
1At the same time, the stakes are getting higher: space debris is accumulating at an alarming rate, the International Space Station (ISS) is nearing the end of its lifespan, reliance on space for normal everyday life is high (communications, GPS, Earth monitoring, combat and humanitarian support), and the term ‘Space Race 2.0’ is appearing with increasing frequency.
2Against this backdrop, key actors are simultaneously pursuing two major approaches to outer space that are completely at odds. On the one hand, most policy-makers, diplomats and military experts believe that there is a rapidly escalating arms race in space that is so potentially explosive that it has ignited a new space race.
3On the other hand, most space experts, scientists and space agencies see our current era as one of intense and growing international and transnational cooperation that is quickly propelling humankind into a significant new phase of the space age.
4The former fear what is to come, while the latter are enthusiastic about future possibilities for humans to become a multiplanetary species. The former assume space is the next war-fighting domain, while the latter see competition in space pursuits as playing a productive role in advancing science and encouraging public investment in space. While these two dominant views could certainly be disaggregated further, it is puzzling that the main groups of people involved in space-related activity could have such radically different perspectives. Moreover, both camps are making important decisions and taking actions based on these views, leaving open the urgent question of what the outcome will be in this new and potentially contentious security domain.
So, which narrative rings true? Are we in the midst of a new space race, or instead at the cusp of a new space age? I argue that human advancement in space conforms overwhelmingly to the narrative of cooperation and peace. Indeed, for those involved in day-to-day activities in space, the military and governmental concerns about an arms race barely register. And for good reason. Despite decades of speculation about war in space, this has not become a reality: space is not weaponized.
5At the same time, the militarist narrative has lately gained traction in light of the proposed US Space Force,6and proponents of it are wilfully choosing to ignore the cooperative trajectory followed to date. This approach, founded in part on a faulty understanding of history, has also started to permeate the international stage. As a result, we need to revisit the historical record, both in terms of how and why space as a peaceful domain emerged and in terms of the resilience over time of the original transformational idea behind human spaceflight. Although space historians have documented in detail the decision-making processes that propelled the 1960s space race, it has since been noted that many earlier accounts were biased towards more hawkish interpretations.
7As Rip Bulkeley writes, the ‘disinformation or misapprehensions of … early space writers’ is significant, and clearly perpetuated the commonly held belief that Soviet accomplishments were a complete surprise to Americans.
8For example, even the most in-depth descriptions rarely mention the fact that as early as 1958, a US–Russian joint moon landing was a US bipartisan policy;9or the fact that, as late as 1962, 47 per cent of Americans were in favour of space cooperation with the Soviet Union.
10While most space historians today are aware of this bias, much of the public and political discourse has already internalized what they take to be ‘common wisdom’ about the space race—that it was simply an extension of the deep distrust and tribalism of the Cold War. These misconceptions are problematic given the political climate surrounding space activity today. Revisiting the historical context, I draw comparisons between the 1960s space race and today's potential space race, arguing that there are striking similarities, but not for the reasons that most assume. Rather than presenting an actual security dilemma in space, I argue, both have been to a significant extent socially constructed through political narrative.
Focusing mainly on the US perspective,11I first review the two most prominent theoretical perspectives in International Relations (IR)—realism and liberalism—and argue that in surprising ways they fail to explain why space has been a peaceful domain thus far. Then, drawing upon archival research12and participant observation,13I elaborate upon my approach, which emphasizes the power of the original spaceflight idea from the 1920s, and its continued influence because of the ways non-state actors have persistently framed space as a peaceful domain, despite potential detractors. While the old space race and the new have parallels, it is in the sense of their remarkably peaceful and cooperative underpinnings. The lesson, however, is that there is always the danger of a self-fulfilling prophecy. Even though there is no weaponization of space now, the fear of the weaponization of space—coming from misperceptions, miscalculations and conflictual rhetoric—could lead to the actual weaponization of space.
The puzzle of peace in spaceSpace practitioners tend to understand today's competing narratives as simply the difference between the civilian and the military space sectors.
14This reasoning comes from the notion that some space agencies, NASA in particular, were conceived of as a means to allow scientists to achieve space exploration breakthroughs without military influence or security implications. However, in practice this civil–military division is artificial. Beyond the clear scientific benefits, space achievements on the so-called civilian side have been regularly used by governments to showcase their technological capacity, deterrence capability, prestige and ‘Great Power’ status as space-faring nations. A case in point is the May 2019 open letter from 43 former US defence officials calling for the creation of the US Space Force, and justifying it in the name of ‘political prestige, international influence, scientific knowledge, technological advancement, homeland security … national defense … [and] economic prosperity’.
15Thus, space should be understood as a diverse arena for policy; it is not as simple as saying that both narratives are right. How, then, are we to evaluate the dynamics of space?IR realists focus on the status of the United States as the most advanced actor in space by an overwhelming margin; this US dominance means that it can largely shape the rules of the game.
16In addition, they see the situation increasingly as one of deterrence, giving credit to the power of newer space actors, such as China and India. Realists tend to emphasize the symbolism or prestige of space competition, a kind of ‘swaggering’ effect in which being able to engage in the space field means that one has attained Great Power status.
17Many realists would agree with the view of some militaries and governments today in observing the emergence of a classic security dilemma that involves more and more actors in a kind of multipolar arms race. But how exactly do they see space as a security domain if it is not technically weaponized?Table 1shows the extent to which we can speak of space as weaponized.
Space as a non-weaponized domainSpace as a non-weaponized domainMost of the potential weapons capabilities do not exist, and those that do are almost entirely consistent with the peaceful use of space. Realists would still argue that President Trump's 2018 Space Force announcement and India's March 2019 anti-satellite test (ASAT) add weight to their perspective, particularly in a context where there is almost no regulation. While we could certainly point to particular policy-makers and countries acting as though they were in a space arms race, the world-views of certain leaders do not a theory make. Space is still actually not weaponized. And there cannot be deterrence in space without actual capability.
Liberals would agree with the assessment that space is largely peaceful, but their explanation for this would hinge upon the strength of the international institutions and legal regimes in place. This argument also falls short. There are few laws governing space, states have not been able to agree to anything binding, and the UN has been remarkably weak in this area.
18The situation might have looked more promising in the early days of the space age. After the launch of Sputnik 1, the 1958 UN General Assembly recognized that ‘it is the common aim that outer space should be used for peaceful purposes only’, and that all of the members of the UN wish ‘to avoid the extension of present national rivalries into this new field’.
19But the most significant agreement, the 1967 Outer Space Treaty, is over half a century old. Since then, certain countries, especially the United States, have been spoilers to agreements, and discussion of any binding treaties is a non-starter.
Why has the UN been so weak? Peterson argues that part of the explanation lies in the choice to deal with space in the UN in the first place, instead of creating a separate regime or global space agency. In the 1950s, states had readily agreed that space should be treated as a global commons (an approach modelled on the law of the seas), but still disagreed strongly on the specific rules and procedures that should apply within that regime.
20The UN's multilateral diplomacy procedures pitted states against each other in a kind of anarchic bargaining setting, where they rushed to try to create rules before space activity had even begun. This environment favoured the superpowers, which were prone to seeing these issues through a militarized lens, and led to reliance on an epistemic community of international lawyers whose brand of legal expertise rested on imperfect analogies with situations on Earth.
Now that human activity in space has increased, the weaknesses of the UN as a forum for the development of a space regime have again become apparent. A key problem is that states approach discussions on space from the perspective of arms control, effectively securitizing space even though there is nothing tangible to securitize.
21They have framed the debate over space in terms that have been historically very difficult to agree. Not only has the arms control lens prevented the formation of a formal space regime, it has also fed into the perspective that an attack is imminent. For the most part, however, since even before the dawn of the space age, space has actually been subject to strongly held common norms. As I will argue, the heightened rhetoric over space today is not unlike the buildup that led to the construction of a space race in the 1960s.
Although realism and liberalism have very different takes on the dynamics of space, they both treat states as unitary and primary actors. In practice, however, states are not unitary. When scholars refer to states, they often actually mean the main political and/or military leaders who make foreign policy decisions on behalf of states. If state-based theories cannot account for outcomes, it makes sense to examine the role of non-state actors. Indeed, we know that non-state actors have often taken the lead in establishing norms in areas of global governance more generally.
22I argue that space is no exception. It is actually a prominent example of a context in which non-state actors set the norms of interaction and abide by them, providing part of the explanation of why ‘space wars’ are still science fiction. The UN has clearly not been the venue to ensure the peaceful nature of space, and it is no coincidence that non-state actors have been sidelined in UN discussions23—formally, only countries can sign treaties and non-state actors are onlysubjectsof international law.
The power of non-state actors—space enthusiasts, private actors, space agencies and scientists—in upholding peaceful norms in space is increasing as these actors become more diverse. Although some would simply subsume them within states—government investment still drives space activity—these actors have from the start been transnationally networked and have had interests distinct from those of governments. Space agencies are orientated towards scientific discovery.
24Commercial actors—particularly large transnational corporations such as Boeing, Raytheon, Thales and BAE Systems—are interested in business opportunities.
25In the past few years, individual companies pursuing space tourism and trips to Mars—such as Virgin Galactic, Blue Origin and SpaceX—have had visionary CEOs, reminiscent of those heading the 1920s rocket societies. Think-tanks devoted to space concerns are growing, and often warn against the militarization of space. In all of these domains scientists and engineers play a strong and influential role by virtue of their expertise, comprising a space epistemic community that contributes to the global governance of space.
26Public–private partnerships are also becoming increasingly common, to the point where there may be emerging concerns about holding private sources of authority to account.
27Nonetheless, these actors are not contributing to the arms race narrative, and they do not have any incentive to do so. These non-state actors have been setting the terms of their relationship with each other and with space for decades.
Building on this, and to explain the puzzle of peace and cooperation in space, I argue that the origin of thehuman spaceflight ideaat the societal, non-state level has had a significant impact on the trajectory of the development of space as an arena for humans. In a nutshell, this idea holds that humankind is a common civilization and space exploration is an intrinsically shared endeavour for the betterment of that civilization. I suggest that the strength of that idea lies both in its inherent nature and in the influence of non-state actors that have been championing and acting on it for the past century. The next section discusses how, layer by layer, non-state actors emerged and grew in influence from rocket societies to space professionals to space agencies to private companies. They pulled states away from the arms race narrative at key moments, persuading politicians of their shared idea.
The origins of space as a cooperative domainWhy are the role of non-state actors and the resilience of the original human spaceflight idea key to understanding the persistence of space as a peaceful domain? First, I argue that the idea itself was the product of a confluence of several strong factors. In the 1920s, it captured people's imaginations and tapped into various dimensions of human nature that have long held appeal. These have included, for example, (1) a desire to cooperate which stems from human evolution itself and our social nature as a species;28(2) the appeal of a common challenge; (3) the drive to explore and discover; and (4) the so-called overview effect, which comes from seeing Earth from space.
29Second, as I describe in detail below, different types of non-state actors have promoted versions of this idea over time.
To be sure, at different times this idea has been stronger or weaker, and it has always existed alongside competition to some degree, especially because governments have continually gravitated towards more militarist thinking. However, there is a difference between scientific, achievement-orientated competition and threat-driven or tribal competition. To the extent that societies have seen space as a venue of tribal competition, this has often been because leaders persuaded people to think about it in this way, as happened during the 1960s space race, and to some extent is happening today. In order to support this argument, I show below that the often more visible dynamic of threat-driven competition, particularly during the space race, was only superficial, and that international cooperation was a much stronger part of the drive to get further into space.
Rocket societiesThe period between the two world wars saw the establishment of several amateur spaceflight organizations and space activist groups, which began to shape the terms of how humans conceived of space long before it was possible to actually go there. In the 1920s and 1930s, the spaceflight movement had already emerged, galvanized by the idea of achieving the human capacity to travel to and eventually settle on other planets. It comprised a diverse network of individuals interested in philosophy, technology and rockets.
30These spaceflight organizations gained membership, became increasingly transnational, and saw public outreach as important in an effort to stoke popular interest in space exploration.
This public outreach gained rapid results. For thousands of years humans have looked to the stars, using them for navigation, finding in them inspiration and wonder. Science fiction played an important role too, especially that of the nineteenth-century writers Jules Verne and H. G. Wells. Thus it is not surprising that many ordinary people became fascinated with the possibility of space exploration in the 1920s. As Stroikos argues, it ‘was largely a social and cultural phenomenon evinced in a wide range of activities, including books, pamphlets, films, experimental research, and exhibitions’.
31Importantly, these amateur groups were highly diverse and widely spread geographically,32eventually forming a strong transnational network in regular communication and exchanging ideas about everything from how to build spaceships to how to live on other planets. The deep ties connecting these groups were so significant that in 1931 there was discussion of forming a supranational umbrella organization to bring them all together.
33Providing strong inspiration and leadership for these societies were scientists experimenting with rocketry. In 1909, Robert Hutchings Goddard began working on rockets in the United States with the goal of eventually launching one to the moon. Despite strong ridicule in the media for suggesting that a rocket could work in space, he finally made his first successful launch in March 1926.
34A year later, on the other side of the Atlantic, the Society for Space Navigation was created, and in the following years Hermann Oberth became a key figure in Germany working with groups of scientists to develop a liquid-fuelled rocket, which they successfully launched in 1931. The Russians were also making advances in rocketry around this time, and were greatly impressed by both Goddard's and Oberth's work. They formed their own rocket society, the Group for the Study of Reactive Motion (GIRD). Konstantin Tsiolkovsky—the father of Russian astronautics—had long been doing parallel work on space rockets, some of it pre-dating Goddard's and Oberth's work, but with many of the same findings. When Tsiolkovsky published the novelVne Zemli(‘Beyond the Planet Earth’) in 1920 about an international team of space adventurers, he galvanized the Russian public around space travel. Goddard and Tsiolkovsky were spoken of among all walks of life in the Soviet Union, and inspired many to work on aspects of space science. Organizations and space societies such as GIRD, the Society for the Study of Interplanetary Communications and the All-Inventors' Vegetarian Club of Interplanetary Cosmopolitans gained thousands of members, regular people who had become space enthusiasts.
There are various ways to understand why people came together to form this societal movement devoted to spaceflight. Humans have long had a pioneering spirit of discovery, and the story of human history has often involved expanding boundaries. Moreover, as Stroikos argues, the movement was encouraged by ‘the idea of science and technology as a unifier of humankind couched in the language of scientific cosmopolitanism and universalism’.
35While there were no doubt multiple motivations, overall those in the spaceflight movement saw the need to achieve peaceful spaceflight through cooperation and for the benefit of humankind.
The Second World War and afterThe Second World War marked a turning-point. The rocket societies did not meet during the war, but significant advances in rocketry as part of fighting it helped to make spaceflight a reality after it was over. Spaceflight scientists and advocates, most notably Wernher von Braun in Germany, got co-opted into the war effort.
36They saw the V2 rockets not as the achievement of their goals, but as a means to an end: more funding and research support for their ultimate goal of human spaceflight. At the end of the war, German scientists ended up in various other countries, notably the United States and the Soviet Union.
After the war, spaceflight enthusiasts resumed their activities in earnest, quickly realizing their long-held common goal of internationalizing their efforts in a much more formal way. On 30 September 1950 the first meeting of the International Astronautical Congress (IAC) took place in Paris. At the gathering, around 40 delegates from ten countries founded the International Astronautical Federation, bringing together 14 rocket societies. While it is true that military efforts to develop missiles had advanced rocketry technology significantly, the main goals of the rocket societies remained the achievement of peaceful spaceflight, the encouragement of international cooperation in space, and building enthusiasm in the public. Before the war, these groups had often been seen as a kind of fringe movement of crackpots, but all this had now changed. As Bainbridge writes of the spaceflight movement, ‘they show the typical evolutionary pattern of successful social movements: born in obscurity as deviant outsider organizations, they grow and mature until they finally gain the status of conventional institutions’.
37In particular, plans started to emerge to formalize the sharing of scientific work, especially in space science, among dozens of countries across the globe—plans that crystallized in what became the International Geophysical Year (IGY) of 1957–8.
So, what led to Sputnik and its aftermath—the so-called space race? There is a commonly accepted understanding of the space race, which I argue is actually wrong. The usual story is that the launch of Sputnik 1 had an immediate and significant impact on American public opinion, sparking fear of a Soviet ballistic missile attack and the loss of US power in the world. Most people tend to assume that Sputnik was a total surprise. However, the historical record does not support this interpretation. On the contrary, the goal of achieving this milestone was actually born out of the IGY. In other words, its origin in fact lay in the movement of international sharing and cooperation, and it represented the culmination of the goals of the early rocket societies.
The International Geophysical YearFormally spearheaded by the United States and led by the International Council of Scientific Unions, the IGY initially attracted 26 countries to sign up as participants—but this quickly grew to 67 countries, involving around 60,000 scientists. The Soviet Union came on board in 1955, specifically in response to the news that the American plans for the IGY included launching satellites into orbit to improve scientific data. In October 1954, the Council formalized the goal of launching satellites during the IGY. To be sure, there were precursors to the IGY satellite initiative in both countries. A group of Soviet scientists had successfully proposed a satellite programme in 1954,38and the Eisenhower administration had started to consider what it would take to put a spy satellite into orbit as early as 1950.
39However, the IGY solidified satellite plans as a peaceful, international endeavour in the name of science. The United States explicitly kept this project separate from any missile programme. As Bulkeley argues, the conspiracy theory—that the US supported the IGY as a foil for launching American satellites under the guise of scientific enquiry—‘must be rejected’.
40The Soviet Union, for its part, became so involved after joining the IGY that it was a chief contributor in nearly all areas of IGY planning, providing among other things 15 of the 48 ships for the oceanography section.
41Indeed, the IGY quickly became the Soviet Union's highest priority in terms of allocating money, personnel and resources, possibly even higher than in the United States.
42The IGY is often described as ‘the largest and most complex international scientific undertaking ever attempted’, and praised for its contributions ‘in overcoming ideological differences as a means of building bridges between science and diplomacy’.
43But while the initial decision to sign up to the enterprise was made at the state level, the actual participants were a wide range of non-state actors—scientists and regular members of the public (teachers, students, volunteers)—and they were spread across countries whose governments were on opposite sides of the Cold War.
44Literally thousands of stations filled with scientists worked to advance knowledge in a multitude of areas. The cornerstone of the IGY was the ‘free movement of data’—it was agreed that all data would be readily available to all.
45Three World Data Centres were established to compile all the discoveries in one place.
46Nor was participation in the project restricted to scientific elites. There was a concerted effort to get the international public involved, and it was such a significant issue for the world that theNew York Timesassigned a reporter to cover the IGY full time.
47The IGY is not an event often mentioned in connection with the space race, especially among military leaders today, but without an understanding of its deeply and strikingly cooperative nature, one cannot put Sputnik into context. Indeed, without knowing about the IGY, the nature of the space race itself cannot truly be understood.
The space raceAgain, conventional wisdom about the space race is often wrong. There was clearly scientific competition, but advances in space were also the product of international cooperation that was continually encouraged by non-state actors. This side of the story is rarely acknowledged, and even many ostensible experts seem unaware of its existence. And yet this context and its timing are crucially important.
First, Sputnik occurredduringthe IGY, meaning that the goal itself—getting a satellite into orbit—was formally a collective, international endeavour and some of the science needed to achieve it was being widely shared across countries. In the wake of the Sputnik launch there were actually detailed and sustained discussions on international cooperation, with the Soviet Union and United States at their centre. To be sure, there were differences in approach, and the IGY itself was not devoid of national rivalry.
48When it came to satellites, the United States and Soviet Union gave careful consideration to what data would be shared, how quickly the information would be made available, and what would be kept secret for national security reasons—given the potential dual use of launch capabilities for intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs).
49For their part, Russian scientists were open about saying that they would not announce when their attempted first launch would take place. They took the view that it was inappropriate to brag about experimental breakthroughs unless they were actually successful.
50By contrast, Americans were very open about each phase of their satellite plans. Thus, when the announcement was made that the Russians had been first to get a satellite into orbit, many scientists were surprised about the precise timing, but not about the actual achievement.
51Second, contrary to the widespread perception that Sputnik caused immediate panic, in fact it actuallyinspiredpeople. At the time, space became, as one US general described it, ‘a glamorous and spectacular frontier’ that had ‘generated worldwide public excitement’.
52Sputnik had certainly put the issue of space squarely in the public eye, but had aroused not so much fear as excitement among Americans. As Roger Launius, former chief historian for NASA, writes:Most Americans seemed to recognize that the satellite did not pose a threat to the United States and instead congratulations ensued and many people seemed excited by the Soviet success … a generation of Americans embraced the dawn of the space age as a symbol of progress and a better future both on Earth and beyond.
53And five days after Sputnik 1 made it into orbit, President Eisenhower said:Every scientist that I have talked to since this occurred … has spoken in most congratulatory terms about the capabilities of the Russian scientists in putting this thing in the air. They expressed themselves as pleased, rather than chagrined, because at least the Soviets have proved the first part of it—that this thing will successfully orbit.
54TheNew York Timesreported: ‘American scientists at a Soviet Embassy reception, while disappointed that the Russians had beaten them into space, breathed a sigh of relief: “The pressure is off,” they said.’55Joseph Kaplan, chairman of the US programme for the IGY, described the development as ‘fantastic’.
56Moreover, all of the numerous surveys in which the American public were asked what they thought of space exploration after Sputnik showed the same thing: there was little immediate concern over the Soviet achievement. For example, social anthropologists Margaret Mead and Rhoda Metraux polled Americans three days after the launch. They discovered that the vast majority of people were not surprised by it, and neither were they alarmed that somehow the United States had lost something by not being first. A government survey found that only 13 per cent ‘believed that we had fallen behind dangerously’,57and theChicago Daily Newswrote:The satellite project is a peaceful one … Its primary purpose is to obtain knowledge that presumably will be pooled by all nations taking part in the International Geophysical Year. In that aspect we can in good faith congratulate the Russian technicians for a proud achievement.
58This largely benign reaction led Eisenhower to address Congress formally, calling for the creation of NASA as a new, civilian-led agency. An epistemic coalition of a sort had come together, composed of ‘political opponents, scientists, military space advocates, space exploration enthusiasts, and leaders in the aerospace industry’59—many of whom were members of the spaceflight movement—to lobby the government to this end. Democratic Senator Lyndon Baines Johnson (LBJ) co-sponsored the bill in the Senate, insisting that NASA should not be a militarized agency, despite much resistance from some generals and admirals;60and indeed, NASA explicitly aimed to explore space for ‘peaceful purposes for the benefit of all mankind’.
61Third, contrary to the familiar story of pure, militarized competition in the context of the Cold War, the United States and Soviet Union were already talking about the next steps in cooperation at precisely this time. While the nuclear arms race briefly intersected with space competition as both superpowers conducted atmospheric nuclear tests beginning in 1958, they quickly saw the negative repercussions of this activity. Subsequently, a US–Soviet moon landing became an official bipartisan policy of the United States in the same year, and remained so until at least 1963.
62This attitude was reciprocated in Moscow, where Premier Khrushchev expressly indicated his interest in cooperating on this project, and there is a public record affirming these intentions at least as early as 1961.
63All of this came about largely as a result of influence from non-state actors. As James Moltz argues, advisers and scientists convinced American and Soviet leaders of the benefits of exercising ‘strategic self-restraint’ because the weaponization of space—and the environmental damage it would cause—was fundamentally incompatible with human scientific discovery and commercial opportunities.
64So, what happened to change the view of this period to the familiar model of the ‘space race’? It all came down to politics. LBJ and other Democratic Party leaders gave several speeches painting the Soviet satellite launch as a dangerous development for US security, seeking to turn it into a crisis. They essentially constructed an alarmist narrative surrounding Sputnik where none had existed before, referring to the United States falling behind, connecting the satellite to Soviet progress on an ICBM (although the two types of technology were quite different) and expressing national humiliation at having ‘lost’. Ironically, behind the scenes, it was actually LBJ himself who was spearheading the US–USSR joint moon landing initiative.
65Eisenhower, for his part, did not do much to address the issue, or respond to the growing sense that America had somehow fallen behind. Years later, he expressed surprise at how ‘psychologically vulnerable’ the American people were, how readily they connected one achievement to everything else.
66The Democrats alleged a leadership vacuum at the top, using the issue to help pave the way to victory in the election of 1960 and create the environment that led to the eventual rejection by Congress of funding for joint space ventures with the USSR in 1963.
67And their successful presidential candidate, John F. Kennedy (JFK), played a key role in all of this.
Kennedy, of course, is known as the person who inspired the world with his moon speech in 1962 (‘We choose to go to the moon in this decade …’). Of course, he did indeed do this; but his record on space is more mixed than many realize.
68Prior to this speech, even before his election, he had also precipitated a sense of threat that had not previously existed. While developments in space did not alarm Eisenhower, Kennedy used the issue to spark fear in the public, linking his claim that the United States had fallen dangerously behind on space with his talk of the ‘missile gap’, and clearly expressing his view of a ‘disparity of quality and versatility in our space effort which must be filled’.
69In short, JFK clearly capitalized on Sputnik to get elected. Then, midway through his time as president, he completely reversed his stance. He started communicating regularly with officials from NASA and other space experts, and he became a key champion of cooperation with the Soviet Union on space, including proposing the joint moon landing to the UN.
70He also realized (once he had full access to presidential security briefings) that the Americans were actuallynotbehind the Soviets in technological development.
Despite this about-face, in many ways the damage to perceptions, especially among the political establishment, was already done, and persists even to this day. Once the political spin took off, the media ran with it, and the public mood changed from benign interest in and admiration of the Sputnik achievement to heightened alarm and even hysteria.
71This grew to such proportions that many experts in the late 1950s compared Sputnik to Pearl Harbor, and this narrative continued to occupy the minds of historians throughout the Cold War, until it took on the status of conventional wisdom.
72In reality, Sputnik changed nothing tangible. America had not been attacked, and it was still ahead in missile technology and science. As Walter McDougall writes: ‘Thepressassumed Sputnik meant Soviet superiority, and thepresspushed the panic button.’73Despite this, Kennedy (and the narrative he helped construct) was absolutely indispensable to the US goal of landing on the moon within a relatively short period of time, and in rousing the public and investors to support it. He firmly connected space both to the identity of America as a pioneering country, and to the destiny of humankind. As evidence of the strength of this idea, when Apollo 11 landed on the moon in 1969, the spirit of the moment was not tribal or nationalistic, even though it was ultimately an American mission. Indeed, the plaque commemorating the event which still sits on the moon reads: ‘Here men from the planet Earth first set foot upon the moon, July 1969, AD. We came in peace for all mankind.’74Space was no longer about ‘winning’. Command Module pilot Michael Collins described the astronauts' experience on their subsequent world tour: ‘Wherever we went, people, instead of saying “Well, you Americans did it,” everywhere they said, “We did it. We, humankind, we, the human race, we people did it.”’75While everyone was focused on getting to the moon to see what was there, the Apollo missions were just as important in terms of looking back at Earth and realizing that we are all one civilization—the overview effect.
76A permanent human presence in space: 1970s–1990sDebunking some of the misperceptions and caricatures of the space race is just the beginning of understanding the strength and resilience of the original idea of space as a peaceful domain. During subsequent decades, many other cooperative ideas that were first discussed in the 1960s reached fruition, despite the overarching political conflict of the Cold War. Members of the space epistemic community were convincing, and leaders were willing to learn. Soviet–US cooperation on space was a mainstay the whole time, but the enterprise became much more broadly international. The United States had reached out to European countries very early on to initiate cooperation. In 1958, the same year that NASA came into existence, European scientists proposed the creation of the European Space Research Organization.
77It was established in March 1964 and became the European Space Agency in 1975. This enabled European countries to develop the capacity to answer America's call to cooperate on space initiatives, and from the late 1960s NASA–European cooperation grew.
78From very early on, there was discussion of a possible orbital space station, to establish a permanent human presence in space in collaboration with other countries.
79The NASA administrator at the time, James E. Webb, was openly in favour of international cooperation, and in 1969 Alfred Eggers, NASA's assistant administrator for policy, wrote in a memo:The space station tends to make it uniquely suited to a multi-national operation … ideally suited to both the symbolic and actual pooling of resources on an international scale for forging ahead in space for the common good and inspiration of all men on earth.
80After Apollo 11, other countries became far more interested in space and the possibility of developing the technology to become good international partners in this endeavour. Through a series of prominent missions from the 1970s to the 1990s, leading up to the ISS, this idea became a reality.
81First, Nixon's Space Task Group called for the creation of a reusable space transport system that would try to attract ‘international involvement and participation on a broad basis’.
82This resulted in Spacelab, a US–European project which began in 1973. Second, the 1975 joint US–Soviet Apollo–Soyuz mission achieved the capacity for space rescues through a compatible docking system, paving the way for other joint ventures. Third, the Shuttle–Mir mission was so collaborative that many declared that there was actually a detente in space. Fourth, formal discussions for the ISS itself began in May 1977,83although the idea was floated much earlier, with an ‘eyes only’ memo circulated in June 1974.
84Once the Soviet Union began to fall apart, cooperation intensified, and the two countries worked together to launch the first stage of the ISS in 1998.
The activities, achievements and operations of the ISS would not have been possible without the long tradition of sharing technology and resources.
85It is in many ways the pinnacle of what is possible in international cooperation. It is often described as ‘the largest civil cooperation programme in history’,86its explicit aims being the ‘merging of different cultures and techniques reinforcing human communication capabilities across borders and language barriers’.
87As astronaut Alexander Gerst put it in a 2018 phone call from the ISS to the IAC,We live in this amazing machine that was built by around 100,000 people … we have conducted around 3,000 experiments … from more than 100 different countries … And it is obvious that this is a machine—some say it's the most complex machine that humanity has ever built—no single nation could have done that alone.
88The ISS is now over 20 years old, and is unlikely to be able to continue past 2028.
89Its retirement without a replacement would mark the first time in decades that humans from multiple countries would not have a joint presence in space.
Comparisons to Space Race 2.0In challenging some of the common wisdom surrounding the 1960s space race, a key point is that governmental and military rhetoric was the most conflictual and tribalistic aspect. In terms of real action, the United States conducted a number of scientific missions in space, all the while seeking cooperation first and foremost with the Soviet Union, and increasingly with others. It was actually a period in which the main actors involved gravitated towards international cooperation at every turn. It is deeply ironic that the very man—JFK—who delivered one of the most inspirational presidential speeches in collective memory—his moon speech—was one of the same people who initiated the space race narrative.
The legacy of the caricatured version of the space race, as a quintessential security dilemma, has a significant influence on how many perceive space today. While Donald Trump is certainly no Jack Kennedy, the narrative surrounding the Space Force is one of the strongest symbols of Space Race 2.0, and reminiscent of the construction of crisis and panic that eventually followed Sputnik. Ambassador Li Song, Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the UN in Geneva, said in 2019 that ‘a superpower’ (i.e. the United States) had explicitly defined space as a war domain, and there was already an imminent threat. He said, indeed, that ‘if we still insist that there is no arms race, we are either selectively blind or lacking political will’.
90But what does the Space Force amount to really? The possibility of creating a section of the military devoted to space is not solely a product of today's climate, having been in discussion in the United States since at least the early 1990s. Nevertheless, perceptions matter, and the fact that it happens to be the Trump administration that is finally moving forward with the proposal links it firmly to Trump's tribalistic and undiplomatic approach to foreign policy. Moreover, Trump's Space Force has been framed in a way that goes markedly against the grain of the history of international cooperation in space. American officials talk about the Space Force in terms of ‘allies’ versus ‘adversaries’, and have even publicly promoted the slogan, ‘Always the predator, never the prey’, to justify its creation.
91Sharpened militaristic rhetoric like this only serves to emphasize the potential for, and possibly even create, a security dilemma in space.
92Again, I would argue that the narrative about a security dilemma today is socially constructed, with little yet in the way of tangible threat. It is important to note that several other countries—China, Japan and Russia, with India and France too considering plans—also have what essentially amount to space forces, but have not framed these enterprises in the same way as the United States. Indeed, experts close to these forces, including some in the US, largely view the matter as a logistical issue.
93There is no actual impetus to build space-ships that will fight wars in space or take weapons to space. While the phrase ‘Space Force’ conjures up images of war-fighting in space, this is not actually possible. It is just more efficient to have a dedicated space budget should there emerge a future need to develop defensive capabilities in space. US Space Force plans do not involve hiring additional personnel or troops, just reallocating existing resources.
94Capabilities in space are essentially still limited to the dual use of satellites, which is compatible with the peaceful use of space. In short, there is ultimately little substance to the arms race narrative; there is only the danger that it could become self-fulfilling.
In contrast to the notion of space as a battlefield, the international community of space experts is still laser-focused on cooperation. At the 2018 International Astronautical Congress, the flagship gathering of the space community, literally every plenary on space emphasized the indispensability of international cooperation and of space as a peaceful realm of international activity, echoing the narrative from the rocket societies of a century ago.
95Even the idea of creating aglobalspace agency has been openly discussed. As Sylvain Laporte, president of the Canadian Space Agency, said: ‘We all know how important it is to collaborate internationally in order to have success in space.’ And in the words of NASA administrator Jim Bridenstine, ‘We want to do more than we've ever done before and collaboration and cooperation is the way to get it done.’96Private companies are relative newcomers to the landscape of non-state actors involved in space—they did not develop independent space capabilities in the West until the 1970s, or in other countries until the 1980s and 1990s97—but they too recognize the importance of international cooperation. Evgeny Mikrin, general designer at the Russian company RSC Energia, speaking about the benefits of the ISS, said:Being integrated, we have achieved a very synergistic effect. None of our partners would have been able to have made this achievement by themselves. This nice experience cannot be lost. We have to move together, working together. We consider and take into account the problems that arise when we work together. When we discuss future progress of deep space missions, we have already dealt with problems that have been solved on the ISS.
98And, as Mark Mulqueen of Boeing said at the IAC, ‘International cooperation [regarding] space goes back thousands of years’;99so, as we look to the future, to the moon, and to Mars, international cooperation will continue to be vital.
ConclusionIt is estimated that by 2040 the size of the space economy will have more than tripled compared to 2017,100with space truly becoming a new frontier for human activity. With a growing diversity of actors involved, and facing the vast, unexplored depths of the universe, space can become a venue for virtually limitless human flourishing. At the same time, it risks becoming an arena for the extension of existing problems on Earth, especially when short-sighted politicians use it simply to gain some imagined strategic edge.
I have argued that, so far, the resilience of the human spaceflight idea has anchored us in the dream of scientific discovery, cooperation and the power of possibility. In the early days, the emerging transnational space community of the 1920s was a societal-level movement with a passionate interest in achieving what was at the time impossible: human spaceflight. As governments took an interest in space after the Second World War, investment in space activities increased significantly; but they brought a militaristic and threat-based competitive drive to it for the first time. However, in the process, non-state actors, from space agencies to scientists to astronauts, have been crucial in persuading leaders against the weaponization of space. And they have been successful. For them, conceiving of space as just the area surrounding Earth—a new sphere to be exploited—is myopic.
As the front-runners in space exploration, American leaders should back down from their ‘us vs them’ rhetoric and acknowledge the indispensable nature of international cooperation in space. The notion of a Space Race 2.0 is a construction for the sake of political expediency, but with the potential to trigger a security dilemma that could quickly become difficult to rein in. As in the 1960s, any talk of a new space race is neither necessary nor a reflection of reality. Although few of the public realize it, even NASA's new Artemis programme is an international project. Artemis, with its Orion spacecraft, which will be used for multiple populated launches to the moon and beyond, would not be possible without the heavy-lift launch vehicle (Ariane) provided by the European Space Agency. Even though there is always the possibility of a self-fulfilling security dilemma, the lessons of the 1960s space race and the decades of subsequent international cooperation should help dispel the notion that space is inevitably a battlefield. It should actually be a reminder of our common humanity.
FootnotesSpace Foundation, cited inNational Geographic, July 2019, p. 91.
Rajeswari Pillai Rajagopalan, ‘The global Space Race, 2.0’,Washington Post, 13 Feb. 2018; Rahul Sachitanand, ‘Space Race 2.0: a low-down on the great flight’,Economic Times, 25 Aug. 2018; Alistair Charlton, ‘Space Race 2.0: how SpaceX, Virgin Galactic, Blue Origin and more will take us to the stars’,International Business Times, 11 July 2017.
Participant observation, UN annual Space Security conference, May 2019, Geneva.
Participant observation, International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Bremen, Germany, Oct. 2018.
While it is true that on some level, almost anything could be used as a weapon—a satellite could be intentionally crashed into another satellite, for example—this is a far cry from space being a militarized realm.
Office of the Press Secretary, ‘Space policy directive-4: establishment of the United States Space Force’, 19 Feb. 2019; US Department of Defense, ‘DOD submits U.S. Space Force proposal’, 1 March 2019; Kaitlyn Johnson, ‘Space Force or Space Corps? Competing visions for a new military service’, Center for Strategic and International Studies Brief, June 2019.
Rip Bulkeley,The Sputniks crisis and early United States space policy(London: Macmillan, 1991), p. 12.
Bulkeley,The Sputniks crisis, p. 15.
Letter from President John F. Kennedy to Albert Thomas, 23 Sept. 1963, US–USSR International Cooperation Documentation 1958–64, file 15571, NASA HQ Archives, Washington DC.
Memo from John Glenn to McGeorge Bundy, ‘Proposal concerning space flight information negotiations with the Russians’, 4 Nov. 1963, box 308, national security files, John F. Kennedy Presidential Library, Boston (hereafter JFK Archives).
Given that US politicians have spearheaded the space race narrative, both in the 1960s and today.
JFK Archives; NASA HQ Archives; European Space Agency (ESA) archives, Florence.
At the 2018 IAC and the 2019 UN annual Space Security conference. This methodology has the advantage of allowing observation of practitioners in their own professional settings. See Sara Delamont, ‘Ethnography and participant observation’, in Clive Seale, Giampietro Gobo, Jaber Gubrium and David Silverman, eds,Qualitative research practice(London: Sage, 2004).
Participant observation, UN annual Space Security conference.
‘Open letter in support of establishing the US Space Force’, May 2019,http://highfrontier.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/USSF-LETTER-FINAL-2.pdf. (Unless otherwise noted at point of citation, all URLs cited in this article were accessible on 11 Aug. 2019.)Forrest E. Morgan,Deterrence and first-strike stability in space: a preliminary assessment(Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2010); Michael Hansel, ‘The USA and arms control in space: an IR analysis’,Space Policy26: 2, May 2010, pp. 91–8; Baohui Zhang, ‘The security dilemma in the US–China military space relationship: the prospects for arms control’,Asian Survey51: 2, March–April 2011, pp. 311–32; Christian Davenport, ‘The battlefield 22,000 miles above Earth’,Wilson Quarterly, Winter 2019,https://www.wilsonquarterly.com/quarterly/the-new-landscape-in-space/the-battlefield-22-000-miles-above-earth/.
Robert J. Art, ‘To what ends military power?’,International Security4: 4, 1980, pp. 3–35.
Participant observation, UN annual Space Security conference.
1348 (XIII), ‘Question of the peaceful use of outer space’, 792nd plenary meeting, 13 Dec. 1958.
M. J. Peterson,International regimes for the final frontier(New York: State University of New York Press, 2005), p. 214.
Participant observation, UN annual Space Security conference.
Mai'a K. Davis Cross, ‘Rethinking epistemic communities twenty years later’,Review of International Studies39: 1, Jan. 2013, pp. 137–60.
Some of the think-tanks and NGOs have observer status.
Lindy Newlove-Eriksson and Johan Eriksson, ‘Governance beyond the global: who controls the extraterrestrial?’,Globalizations10: 2, April 2013, p. 281.
Newlove-Eriksson and Eriksson, ‘Governance beyond the global’, p. 283.
Cross, ‘Rethinking epistemic communities’.
Newlove-Eriksson and Eriksson, ‘Governance beyond the global’.
Matthew Lieberman,Social: why our brains are wired to connect(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013); Jeremy Rifkin,The empathic civilization: the race to global consciousness in a world in crisis(New York: Tarcher/Penguin, 2009).
Frank White,The overview effect: space exploration and human evolution(Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1987).
Dimitrios Stroikos, ‘Engineering world society? Scientists, internationalism, and the advent of the space age’,International Politics55: 1, Jan. 2018, p. 77.
Stroikos, ‘Engineering world society?’, p. 81.
Asif A. Siddiqi, ‘Making spaceflight modern: a cultural history of the world's first space advocacy group’, in Steven J. Dick and Roger D. Launius, eds,Societal impact of spaceflight(Washington DC: NASA Office of External Relations, 2007), pp. 513–37.
Stroikos, ‘Engineering world society?’, p. 82.
Douglas Brinkley,American moonshot: John F. Kennedy and the great space race(New York: HarperCollins, 2019), pp. 8–9.
Stroikos, ‘Engineering world society?’, p. 87.
Brinkley,American moonshot.
William Bainbridge,The spaceflight revolution: a sociological study(Malabar, FL: Krieger, 1983), p. 125.
Stroikos, ‘Engineering world society?’, p. 84; Asif Siddiqi, ‘Sputnik 50 years later: new evidence of its origins’,Acta Astronautica63: 1–4, March 2008, pp. 529–39.
Walter A. McDougall,The heavens and the earth: a political history of the space age(New York: Basic Books, 1985), p. 118.
Bulkeley,The Sputniks crisis, p. 131.
Fae L. Korsmo, ‘The genesis of the International Geophysical Year’,Physics Today60: 7, July 2007, p. 41.
Walter Sullivan,Assault on the unknown: the International Geophysical Year(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1961), p. 29.
Clement J. Zablocki, ‘Foreword’, in Harold Bullis,The political legacy of the International Geophysical Year(Washington DC: US Government Printing Office, 1973).
Korsmo, ‘The genesis of the International Geophysical Year’.
Sullivan,Assault on the unknown, pp. 34–5.
World Data Center A was located in the United States, World Data Center B was in the Soviet Union, and World Data Center C was divided among western Europe, Australia and Japan. Each housed complete IGY scientific records so that nothing would be lost in the event that something happened to one of them: Sullivan,Assault on the unknown, p. 35.
Sullivan,Assault on the unknown, Acknowledgements, p. ix.
Stroikos, ‘Engineering world society?’, pp. 84–7. He argues that scientists were used by governments for the covert pursuit of national interests.
Bulkeley,The Sputniks crisis, ch. 8. Most American space historians ‘have merely endorsed the patriotic version of events’, echoing a political sentiment at the time that the Soviets had somehow ‘cheated’ by not sharing data in accordance with IGY agreements. In fact, they did share much of what they could, even if somewhat unevenly at first, and the US for its part also shied away from full openness: p. 120.
Sullivan,Assault on the unknown, p. 66.
Roger Launius, ‘An unintended consequence of the IGY: Eisenhower, Sputnik, and the founding of NASA’,Acta Astronautica67: 1–2, July–Aug. 2010, p. 257.
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, ‘Excerpts from General Schriver's testimony before the Subcommittee on Governmental Organization for Space Activities’, 23 April 1959, pre-presidential papers #2, box 568, file 3, JFK Archives.
Launius, ‘An unintended consequence of the IGY’, pp. 257–8.
As quoted in Sullivan,Assault on the unknown, p. 77.
New York Times, 5 Oct. 1957, as quoted in Martha Wheeler George,The impact of Sputnik I: case-study of American public opinion at the break of the space age, NASA historical note no. 22, 4 Oct. 1957, file 6719, NASA HQ.
New York Times, 5 Oct. 1957, as quoted in George,The impact of Sputnik I.
As quoted in Launius, ‘An unintended consequence of the IGY’, p. 258.
‘Russian “moon” casts big shadow’,Chicago Daily News, 7 Oct. 1957. The article then goes on to address the ‘sinister’ way this capacity could be used for missiles. Eventually, the media played into the space race narrative.
Launius, ‘An unintended consequence of the IGY’, p. 260.
Brinkley,American moonshot, pp. 163–5.
National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958.
Letter from Kennedy to Thomas, 23 Sept. 1963.
Memorandum for the President, ‘The US proposal for a joint US–USSR lunar program’, 29 Oct. 1963; memorandum from Glenn to Bundy, ‘Proposal concerning space flight’. On 26 Oct. 1963, Khrushchev also said that he had no intention of participating in a ‘race to the moon’, and did not have a programme to do so: Memorandum from Herron to Packard, ‘Khruschev's October 26 statement on the race to the moon’, 28 Oct. 1963. All in national security files, box 308, JFK Archives.
James Clay Moltz,The politics of space security: strategic restraint and the pursuit of national interests(Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2019), pp. 47–50. While I agree with Moltz in terms of how scientists have been able to facilitate learning in leaders, I differ with him on the timing: he argues that the impetus for international cooperation in space can be dated to 1962, but in fact it began much earlier than this.
Letter from Kennedy to Thomas, 23 Sept. 1963.
Dwight D. Eisenhower,The White House years: waging peace, 1956–1961(New York: Doubleday, 1965).
Letter from Glenn to Bundy, ‘Proposal concerning space flight’.
W. D. Kay, ‘John F. Kennedy and the two faces of the US space program, 1961–63’,Presidential Studies Quarterly28: 3, June 1998, pp. 573–86.
Letter from Kennedy to Pickering, 23 Oct. 1959, pre-presidential papers, box 726, JFK Archives.
Memo, ‘The US proposal for a joint US–USSR lunar program’.
McDougall,The heavens and the earth, pp. 142–8.
See e.g. McDougall,The heavens and the earth.
McDougall,The heavens and the earth, p. 148.
As cited in Alexander C. T. Geppert, ‘Spacepersonae: cosmopolitan networks of peripheral knowledge, 1927–1957’,Journal of Modern European History6: 2, 2008, pp. 262–86 at p. 262.
David McNab and Christopher Riley,In the shadow of the moon(film), MagellanTV, 2007.
White,The overview effect.
European Space Conference, ministerial conference, ‘Minutes of the meeting held in Paris on 13th December 1966’, CSE/CM PV 1 final, file ESC 1, ESA archives.
Roger M. Bonnet and Vittorio Manno,International cooperation in space: the example of the European Space Agency(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1994), p. 75.
Memorandum from Dr Alfred Eggers to Dr Newell, ‘The space station and international collaboration’, 17 March 1969, file 9164, NASA HQ.
Memo from Eggers to Newell, ‘The space station’, p. 2.
‘Space station documentation (1968–69)’, file 9164, NASA HQ.
‘Europe to build spacelab for US reusable space shuttle’, NASA news release no. 73–191, 24 Sept. 1973, file 8864, NASA HQ.
‘US and Russia announce talks on operating space station in 80s’,New York Times, 17 May 1977, p. A15.
File 15523, NASA HQ.
Hannah Kohler, ‘The eagle and the hare: US–Chinese relations, the Wolf Amendment, and the future of international cooperation in space’,Georgetown Law Journal103: 5, 2015, pp. 1135–62.
ESA Manned Space Programme: draft programme proposal on the European participation in the ISSA, ES/PB-MS(94)60, Paris, 22 Dec. 1994, p. 1, ESA file 18499, ESA archives.
ESA Manned Space Programme, p. 2.
Participant observation, IAC, 2018.
Sarah Sloat, ‘NASA chief announces a 2028 expiration date for the ISS: “It is inevitable”’,Inverse, 19 March 2016,https://www.inverse.com/article/15852-nasa-chief-announces-a-2028-expiration-date-for-the-iss-it-is-inevitable.
Participant observation, UN Space Security conference, 2019.
Theresa Hitchens, ‘Experts warn Space Force rhetoric risks backfiring’,Breaking Defense, 28 May 2019.
Stewart M. Patrick, ‘A new space age demands international cooperation, not competition or “dominance”’,World Politics Review, 20 May 2019.
Participant observation, UN Space Security conference, 2019.
Senate hearing on ‘Establishing a Space Force’, 14 May 2019.
Participant observation, IAC, 2018.
Bridenstine, Panel on ‘The ISS as a “launch pad” for the future astronautics’, IAC 2018.
Peterson,International regimes for the final frontier, p. 18.
Mikrin, Panel on ‘The ISS as a “launch pad”’.
Mulqueen, Panel on ‘The ISS as a “launch pad”’.
Space Foundation, cited inNational Geographic, July 2019, p. 91.
Author notesThe author would like to thank Justin Haner for his valuable research assistance, NASA archivist Elizabeth Sukow, as well as Robert Cross, Marianne Riddervold, Kristi Govella, Julie Klinger, Pernille Rieker and three anonymous reviewers for their feedback.
Email alertsRelated articles inCiting articles viaLatestMost ReadMost CitedConnectResourcesExploreOxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and education by publishing worldwideThis Feature Is Available To Subscribers OnlySign InorCreate an AccountThis PDF is available to Subscribers OnlyFor full access to this pdf, sign in to an existing account, or purchase an annual subscription.
