old id = 3027
With This CAD for Genomes, You Can Design New Organisms - IEEE Spectrum
2019
https://spectrum.ieee.org/the-human-os/biomedical/ethics/with-this-cad-for-genomes-you-can-design-new-organisms

TopicsSectionsMoreFor IEEE MembersFor IEEE MembersIEEE SpectrumFollow IEEE SpectrumSupport IEEE SpectrumIEEE websites place cookies on your device to give you the best user experience. By using our websites, you agree to the placement of these cookies. To learn more, read our Privacy Policy.
Enjoy more free content and benefits by creating an accountSaving articles to read later requires an IEEE Spectrum accountThe Institute content is only available for membersDownloading full PDF issues is exclusive for IEEE MembersAccess toSpectrum's Digital Edition is exclusive for IEEE MembersFollowing topics is a feature exclusive for IEEE MembersAdding your response to an article requires an IEEE Spectrum accountCreate an account to access more content and features onIEEE Spectrum, including the ability to save articles to read later, download Spectrum Collections, and participate in conversations with readers and editors. For more exclusive content and features, considerJoining IEEE.
Join the world’s largest professional organization devoted to engineering and applied sciences and get access to all of Spectrum’s articles, archives, PDF downloads, and other benefits.
Learn more →Access Thousands of Articles — Completely FreeCreate an account and get exclusive content and features:Save articles, download collections,andtalk to tech insiders— all free! For full access and benefits,join IEEEas a paying member.
With This CAD for Genomes, You Can Design New OrganismsForthcoming software from the GP-Write consortium aims to make large-scale genome editing and design more accessibleImagine being able to design a new organism as easily as you can design a new integrated circuit. That’s the ultimate vision behind the computer-aided design (CAD) program being developed by theGP-write consortium.
“We’re taking the same things we’d do for design automation in electronics, and applying them to biology,” saysDoug Densmore, an associate professor of electrical and computer engineering at Boston University. One of Densmore’s startups,Lattice Automation, is leading the effort to develop the CAD. He says the first version will be available by the end of the year.
One of Densmore’s hopes for the project is that it will help computer scientists see a way to get involved in genetics and biology. “There are some really brilliant computer scientists out there, who might say, ‘I don’t get what this is doing biologically, but I like the coding,’” he notes.
The inspiration for GP-write, more formally known as Genome Project-write, comes from theHuman Genome Projectof the 1990s and early 2000s. That effort to read the entire DNA sequence of a human being famously catalyzed the development of DNA sequencing technologies and launched entirely new fields of medicine. The GP-write team hypothesizes that a new focus on “writing” genomes can bring about similar revolutions.
What does it mean to write a genome? It means going far beyond the current edits done with cutting-edge tools such asCRISPR, and designing DNA sequences to create human or animal cells with new properties. Pioneering synthetic biology companies such asGingko BioworksandZymergenare already redesigning single-celled organisms like yeast and bacteria, turning them into microscopic factories that produce desirable substances.
In a2019 paperthat described the vision, GP-write scientists wrote that an accessible and user-friendly CAD program will make genome design faster, cheaper, and more reliable. “If we can drive down the costs of genome writing, the applications would be transformative,” saysAmy Schwartz, president and co-executive director of GP-write. She tellsIEEE Spectrumthat she foresees applications in medicine, energy, materials, and other industries.
The CAD program will be freely available to academics, as well as GP-write’s industry partners and companies that are selected to participate in its new incubator. Other companies will be able to access it for a fee, Schwartz says. The platform will also include order forms so users can send their CAD files to companies that manufacture synthetic DNA; the designed constructs can then be shipped to users so they can see how their design turn out in real life.
Schwartz’s team aims to help scientists go far beyond changing individual base pairs (the most basic units of DNA). It’s intended to capture scientists’ intent at a far higher and more abstract level. If, for example, they want to add a new metabolic pathway to create a certain protein, the CAD will make all the necessary changes in all the necessary places in the genome. It’s also meant to catch coding errors that would result in a dysfunctional cell, and to accurately predict the functional effect of edits on a cell—the kind of assessment that typically requires a human expert today.
Asked for an example of how this CAD might help scientists, Boston University’s Densmore comes up with a medical hypothetical. “Imagine I wanted to engineer a bacterium that contains a biosensor that detects some condition in the gut, and that then releases some therapeutic,” he says. That would require adding a gene for the biosensor, a gene that codes for the production of the therapeutic substance, which would build up inside the bacteria, and then a self-destruct gene that would cause the bacteria to rupture and release its medicine. “You might want to know how those added genes would interact,” Densmore says, and the CAD could essentially check the code for bugs and make predictions about the bacteria’s function.
Farren Isaacs, another key collaborator and an associate professor of molecular, cellular, and developmental biology at Yale University, says they’re “trying to develop a one-stop shop for genome design.” He notes that the CAD will start with just a few organisms’ reference genomes, such as yeast and theE. colibacterium, but that it will be designed to work with any reference genome.
Biosafety is top of mind for anyone involved in gene editing and synthetic biology. GP-write has pledged that the CAD will meet the high biosafety standards of theInternational Gene Synthesis Consortium.
As a first step, it will check any designed sequences against a database of dangerous sequences to ensure that users aren’t creating viruses or other bioweapons. It will also ultimately check that the cell or organism won’t proliferate in an unchecked fashion or cause problems in the environment.
While GP-write hopes its CAD will become a standard tool for the growing synthetic biology industry, established companies seem unlikely to switch over from their existing genome editing and design systems.
At Ginkgo Bioworks,Patrick Boyleheads a team that works on Codebase, the company’s repository of genetic “modules” that can be used again and again in projects. He says that Ginkgo has a customized software stack that enables the company to design as many as 20,000 new genes in a month. “To really write at scale, you do need CAD,” Boyle says. “It’s really about writing python libraries—at the scale at which we’re designing new sequences, you’re not going to use a drag-and-drop interface,” he says.
While Ginkgo will continue to use its proprietary software, Boyle sees utility in the GP-write CAD effort. “A lot of the software that’s out there for DNA design today is for scientists working at the bench, putting together a few pieces of DNA to drive a project,” he says. “If you’re trying to put together 1000 DNA pieces, you need different software and a different interface.”If the CAD program does catch on in academia and industry, it may face scrutiny from bioethicists.
“I see a potential clash between the easy CAD design process and the messy complexities of real-life applications,” saysJoachim Boldt, a bioethicist at Freiburg University who frequently writesabout synthetic biology. He worries that an easy-to-use platform “could make users overestimate the reliability of the predicted outcomes, especially those users who are not familiar with the limits of the underlying algorithms.”Boldt argues for international regulations on genome editing technologies, and wants those regulations to take a nuanced view, drawing distinctions between different types of organisms and different applications. If genome editing and design is done without responsible policies from institutions and governments, “we have a problem,” he says.
The GP-write team says they’re creating a living CAD that will evolve as the science, technology, and regulations do. If computer scientists and electrical engineers are willing to engage now, Densmore says, they’ll find plenty to work on for the rest of their careers. “In the 21stcentury, biology will provide the most interesting technology problems,” he says.
Eliza Stricklandis a senior editor atIEEE Spectrum, where she covers AI, biomedical engineering, and other topics. She holds a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.
Video Friday: Drone in a CageRemembering 1982 IEEE President Robert LarsonAcer Goes Big on Glasses-Free, 3D Monitors—Look Out, VRRelated StoriesIBM’s Target: a 4,000-Qubit Processor by 2025Behind the Design of the Tron VideogameWorldwide Campaign for Neurorights Notches Its First WinThis CAD Program Can Design New OrganismsGenetic engineers have a powerful new tool to write and edit DNA codeFoundries such as the Edinburgh Genome Foundry assemble fragments of synthetic DNA and send them to labs for testing in cells.
In the next decade,medical science may finally advance cures for some of the most complex diseases that plague humanity. Many diseases are caused by mutations in the human genome, which can either be inherited from our parents (such as in cystic fibrosis), or acquired during life, such as most types of cancer. For some of these conditions, medical researchers have identified the exact mutations that lead to disease; but in many more, they're still seeking answers. And without understanding the cause of a problem, it's pretty tough to find a cure.
We believe that a key enabling technology in this quest is a computer-aided design (CAD) program for genome editing, which our organization is launching this week at theGenome Project-write (GP-write) conference.
With this CAD program, medical researchers will be able to quickly design hundreds of different genomes with any combination of mutations and send the genetic code to a company that manufactures strings of DNA. Those fragments of synthesized DNA can then be sent to a foundry for assembly, and finally to a lab where the designed genomes can be tested in cells. Based on how the cells grow, researchers can use the CAD program to iterate with a new batch of redesigned genomes, sharing data for collaborative efforts. Enabling fast redesign of thousands of variants can only be achieved through automation; at that scale, researchers just might identify the combinations of mutations that are causing genetic diseases. This is the first critical R&D step toward finding cures.
Applications for the CAD software extend far beyond medicine and throughout the burgeoning field ofsynthetic biology, which involves redesigning organisms to give them new abilities. For example, we envision users designing solutions for biomanufacturing; it's possible that society could reduce its reliance on petroleum thanks to microorganisms that produce valuable chemicals and materials. And to aid the fight against climate change, users could design microorganisms that ingest and lock up carbon, thus reducing atmospheric carbon dioxide (the main driver of global warming).
DNA, the molecule that encodes instructions for life, is composed of four types of nitrogen bases, which pair up to create what look like the rungs of a twisted ladder.
James ProvostOur consortium,GP-write, can be understood as a sequel to theHuman Genome Project, in which scientists first learned how to "read" the entire genetic sequence of human beings. GP-write aims to take the next step in genetic literacy by enabling the routine "writing" of entire genomes, each with tens of thousands of different variations. As genome writing and editing becomes more accessible, biosafety is a top priority. We're building safeguards into our system from the start to ensure that the platform isn't used to craft dangerous or pathogenic sequences.
Need a quick refresheron genetic engineering? It starts withDNA, the double-stranded molecule that encodes the instructions for all life on our planet. DNA is composed of four types of nitrogen bases—adenine (A), thymine (T), guanine (G), and cytosine (C)—and the sequence of those bases determines the biological instructions in the DNA. Those bases pair up to create what look like the rungs of a long and twisted ladder. The human genome (meaning the entire DNA sequence in each human cell) is composed of approximately 3 billion base-pairs. Within the genome are sections of DNA calledgenes,many of which code for the production of proteins; there are more than 20,000 genes in the human genome.
TheHuman Genome Project, which produced the first draft of a human genome in 2000, took more than a decade and cost about$2.7 billionin total. Today, an individual's genome can be sequenced in a day for$600, with some predicting that the $100 genome is not far behind. The ease of genome sequencing has transformed both basic biological research and nearly all areas of medicine. For example, doctors have been able to precisely identify genomic variants that are correlated with certain types of cancer, helping them to establish screening regimens for early detection. However, the process of identifying and understanding variants that cause disease and developing targeted therapeutics is still in its infancy and remains a defining challenge.
Until now, genetic editing has been a matter of changing one or two genes within a massive genome; sophisticated techniques likeCRISPRcan create targeted edits, but at a small scale. And although many software packages exist to help with gene editing and synthesis, the scope of those software algorithms is limited to single or few gene edits. Our CAD program will be the first to enable editing and design at genome-scale, allowing users to change thousands of genes, and it will operate with a degree of abstraction and automation that allows designers to think about the big picture. As users create new genome variants and study the results in cells, each variant's traits and characteristics (called its phenotype) can be noted and added to the platform's libraries. Such a shared database could vastly speed up research on complex diseases.
What's more, current genomic design software requires human experts to predict the effect of edits. In a future version, GP-write's software will include predictions of phenotype to help scientists understand if their edits will have the desired effect. All the experimental data generated by users can feed into a machine-learning program, improving its predictions in a virtuous cycle. As more researchers leverage the CAD platform and share data (the open-source platform will be freely available to academia), its predictive power will be enhanced and refined.
Our first version of the CAD software will feature a user-friendly graphical interface enabling researchers to upload a species' genome, make thousands of edits throughout the genome, and output a file that can go directly to a DNA synthesis company for manufacture. The platform will also enable design sharing, an important feature in the collaborative efforts required for large-scale genome-writing initiatives.
There are clear parallelsbetween CAD programs for electronic and genome design. To make a gadget with four transistors, you wouldn't need the help of a computer. But today's systems may have billions of transistors and other components, and designing them would be impossible without design-automation software. Likewise, designing just a snippet of DNA can be a manual process. But sophisticated genomic design—with thousands to tens of thousands of edits across a genome—is simply not feasible without something like the CAD program we're developing. Users must be able to input high-level directives that are executed across the genome in a matter of seconds.
Our CAD program will be the first to enable editing at genome-scale, with a degree of abstraction and automation that allows designers to think about the big picture.
A good CAD program for electronics includes certain design rules to prevent a user from spending a lot of time on a design, only to discover that it can't be built. For example, a good program won't let the user put down transistors in patterns that can't be manufactured or put in a logic that doesn't make sense. We want the same sort of design-for-manufacture rules for our genomic CAD program. Ultimately, our system will alert users if they're creating sequences that can't be manufactured by synthesis companies, which currently have limitations such as trouble with certain repetitive DNA sequences. It will also inform users if their biological logic is faulty; for example, if the gene sequence they added to code for the production of a protein won't work, because they've mistakenly included a "stop production" signal halfway through.
But other aspects of our enterprise seem unique. For one thing, our users may import huge files containing billions of base-pairs. The genome of thePolychaos dubium, a freshwater amoeboid, clocks in at 670 billion base-pairs—that's over 200 times larger than the human genome! As our CAD program will be hosted on the cloud and run on any Internet browser, we need to think about efficiency in the user experience. We don't want a user to click the "save" button and then wait ten minutes for results. We may employ the technique of lazy loading, in which the program only uploads the portion of the genome that the user is working on, or implement other tricks with caching.
Getting a DNA sequence into the CAD program is just the first step, because the sequence, on its own, doesn't tell you much. What's needed is another layer of annotation to indicate the structure and function of that sequence. For example, a gene that codes for the production of a protein is composed of three regions: the promoter that turns the gene on, the coding region that contains instructions for synthesizing RNA (the next step in protein production), and the termination sequence that indicates the end of the gene. Within the coding region, there are "exons," which are directly translated into the amino acids that make up proteins and "introns," intervening sequences of nucleotides that are removed during the process of gene expression. There are existing standards for this annotation that we want to improve on, so our standardized interface language will be readily interpretable by people all over the world.
The CAD program from GP-write will enable users to apply high-level directives to edit a genome, including inserting, deleting, modifying, and replacing certain parts of the sequence.
GP-writeOnce a user imports the genome, the editing engine will enable the user to make changes throughout the genome. Right now, we're exploring different ways to efficiently make these changes and keep track of them. One idea is an approach we call genome algebra, which is analogous to the algebra we all learned in school. In mathematics, if you want to get from the number 1 to the number 10, there are infinite ways to do it. You could add 1 million and then subtract almost all of it, or you could get there by repeatedly adding tiny amounts. In algebra, you have a set of operations, costs for each of those operations, and tools that help organize everything.
In genome algebra, we have four operations: we can insert, delete, invert, or edit sequences of nucleotides. The CAD program can execute these operations based on certain rules of genomics, without the user having to get into the details. Similar to the "PEMDAS rule" that defines the order of operations in arithmetic, the genome editing engine must order the user's operations correctly to get the desired outcome. The software could also compare sequences against each other, essentially checking their math to determine similarities and differences in the resulting genomes.
In a later version of the software, we'll also have algorithms that advise users on how best to create the genomes they have in mind. Some altered genomes can most efficiently be produced by creating the DNA sequence from scratch, while others are more suited to large-scale edits of an existing genome. Users will be able to input their design objectives and get recommendations on whether to use a synthesis or editing strategy—or a combination of the two.
Users can import any genome (here, the E. coli bacteria genome), and create many edited versions; the CAD program will automatically annotate each version to show the changes made.
GP-writeOur goal is to makethe CAD program a "one-stop shop" for users, with the help of the members of our Industry Advisory Board:Agilent Technologies, a global leader in life sciences, diagnostics and applied chemical markets; the DNA synthesis companiesAnsa Biotechnologies,DNA Script, andTwist Bioscience; and the gene editing automation companiesInscriptaandLattice Automation. (Lattice was founded by coauthor Douglas Densmore). We are also partnering with biofoudries such as theEdinburgh Genome Foundrythat can take synthetic DNA fragments, assemble them, and validate them before the genome is sent to a lab for testing in cells.
Users can most readily benefit from our connections to DNA synthesis companies; when possible, we'll use these companies' APIs to allow CAD users to place orders and send their sequences off to be synthesized. (In the case of DNA Script, when a user places an order it would be quickly printed on the company's DNA printers; some dedicated users might even buy their own printers for more rapid turnaround.) In the future, we'd like to make the ordering step even more user-friendly by suggesting the company best suited to the manufacture of a particular sequence, or perhaps by creating a marketplace where the user can see prices from multiple manufacturers, the way people do on airfare sites.
We've recently added two new members to our Industrial Advisory Board, each of which brings interesting new capabilities to our users.
Catalog Technologiesis the first commercially viable platform to use synthetic DNA for massive digital storage and computation, and could eventually help users store vast amounts of genomic data generated on GP-write software. The other new board member isSOSV'sIndieBio, the leader in biotech startup development. It will work with GP-write to select, fund, and launch companies advancing genome-writing science from IndieBio's New York office. Naturally, all those startups will have access to our CAD software.
We're motivated by a desireto make genome editing and synthesis more accessible than ever before. Imagine if high-school kids who don't have access to a wet lab could find their way to genetic research via a computer in their school library; this scenario could enable outreach to future genome design engineers and could lead to a more diverse workforce. Our CAD program could also entice people with engineering or computational backgrounds—but with no knowledge of biology—to contribute their skills to genetic research.
Because of this new level of accessibility, biosafety is a top priority. We're planning to build several different levels of safety checks into our system. There will be user authentication, so we'll know who's using our technology. We'll have biosecurity checks upon the import and export of any sequence, basing our "prohibited" list on the standards devised by theInternational Gene Synthesis Consortium(IGSC), and updated in accordance with their evolving database of pathogens and potentially dangerous sequences. In addition to hard checkpoints that prevent a user from moving forward with something dangerous, we may also develop a softer system of warnings.
Imagine if high-school kids who don't have access to a lab could find their way to genetic research via a computer in their school library.
We'll also keep a permanent record of redesigned genomes for tracing and tracking purposes. This record will serve as a unique identifier for each new genome and will enable proper attribution to further encourage sharing and collaboration. The goal is to create a broadly accessible resource for researchers, philanthropies, pharmaceutical companies, and funders to share their designs and lessons learned, helping all of them identify fruitful pathways for advancing R&D on genetic diseases and environmental health. We believe that the authentication of users and annotated tracking of their designs will serve two complementary goals: It will enhance biosecurity while also engendering a safer environment for collaborative exchange by creating a record for attribution.
One project that willput the CAD program to the test is a grand challenge adopted by GP-write, theUltra-Safe Cell Project. This effort, led by coauthor Farren Isaacs and Harvard professorGeorge Church, aims to create a human cell line that is resistant to viral infection. Such virus-resistant cells could be a huge boon to thebiomanufacturingand pharmaceutical industry by enabling the production of more robust and stable products, potentially driving down the cost of biomanufacturing and passing along the savings to patients.
The Ultra-Safe Cell Project relies on a technique called recoding. To build proteins, cells use combinations of three DNA bases, called codons, to code for each amino acid building block. For example, the triplet 'GGC' represents the amino acid glycine, TTA represents leucine, GTC represents valine, and so on. Because there are 64 possible codons but only 20 amino acids, many of the codons are redundant. For example, four different codons can code for glycine: GGT, GGC, GGA, and GGG. If you replaced a redundant codon in all genes (or 'recode' the genes), the human cell could still make all of its proteins. But viruses—whose genes would still include the redundant codons and which rely on the host cell to replicate—would not be able to translate their genes into proteins. Think of a key that no longer fits into the lock; viruses trying to replicate would be unable to do so in the cells' machinery, rendering the recoded cells virus-resistant.
This concept of recoding for viral resistance has already been demonstrated. Isaacs, Church, and their colleagues reported in a 2013 paper inSciencethat, by removing all 321 instances of a single codon from the genome of theE. colibacterium, they could impart resistance to viruses which use that codon. But the ultra-safe cell line requires edits on a much grander scale. We estimate that it would entail thousands to tens of thousands of edits across the human genome (for example, removing specific redundant codons from all 20,000 human genes). Such an ambitious undertaking can only be achieved with the help of the CAD program, which can automate much of the drudge work and let researchers focus on high-level design.
The famed physicistRichard Feynmanonce said, "What I cannot create, I do not understand." With our CAD program, we hope geneticists become creators who understand life on an entirely new level.
