old id = 3888
Make Your Own Lifestyle
2019
https://design.samsung.com/global/contents/bespoke-design

Make YourOwn LifestyleBespoke design begins with the idea that there should be more to a product than its appealing appearance. A design comes to completion when it encompasses the entire customer experience based on deep understanding of users and the space a product occupies. A home appliance that expresses various styles, harmonizes with the environment, and adjusts to lifestyle changes is the north star of Bespoke design.
* The images shown is for illustration purpose only and may differ from the actual product. The product's release date and specifications may vary by country, region, and model.
The Bespoke refrigerator was released in 2019 in the Korean market. It is a personalized refrigerator with customizable panel colors and materials that perfectly fits in your kitchen. A refrigerator that elegantly blends in our homes was unveiled to the world with the arrival of Bespoke.
The Bespoke refrigerator does not only offer a customizable design that reflects individual tastes. The Bespoke refrigerator delivers a new way to select and purchase preferred designs rather than choosing among finished goods. Bespoke boldly envisions new design styles and purchasing experiences to fulfill users’ needs. Its innovation begins here.
The rapidly changing era has altered the meaning and role of our homes. Activities such as working from home, taking remote classes, and indoor exercising have become routine. People want a home that reflects their tastes as more time is spent indoors. The much-loved Samsung Bespoke refrigerator expands its concept beyond the kitchen to the entire house to reflect the changes in our time.
It has become increasingly important to design an overall user experience that considers both usage and space of a product. That’s why a home appliance should be capable of adjusting to a style that suits a user’s home. Additionally, different products placed together should be harmonized while performing their respective functions. Broadening choices by providing various product lines and types is also crucial. These values are embedded in the core of Bespoke design, which serves as the guiding principle for the wide selection of Samsung Electronics’ home appliances.
Bespoke design portrays a home that embodies convenience, joy, and everyday inspirations with flexible functions and seamless connections. Big milestones for families such as moving and childbirth, as well as home activities like remote work and studies are also considered. Modular refrigerator and air purifier products can be expanded and used with additional modules to suit new environments. Services such as cooking and caring for garments or pets are provided by naturally connecting functions and experiences of each home appliance, making life more convenient. Bespoke design continuously adapts and improves based on lifestyles.
The role of designers is more important than ever as customer preferences become more specific and refined. Harry Choi, Head of the Design Team for Samsung Electronics Digital Appliances Business, shares his thoughts on the value and meaning of Bespoke design that affects customers.
Customer expectations are higher as the meaning and value of homes expand its original scope. We aimed for a design that plays a role in enhancing the value of space while harmonizing with the environment rather than emphasizing the product itself. In the past we’ve created designs with the purpose of catching people’s attention, but now I try to design products that customers want to bring home. The way of approaching design has completely changed. We wanted home appliances to become entities that embellish the surroundings, not mere machines that occupy space.
Customers now have easier access to product information, meaning we must design with more attention to specific details. Customers should be allowed to choose according to their tastes, rather than being given few options. A system that fulfills users’ needs must replace methods of mass production.
Everyone has different home behaviors and patterns, and we are looking to expand products that are specialized for specific purposes. As standards of living rise, customers are looking for tools that are specialized for specific needs. For example, the Bespoke Jet™ is optimized for deep cleaning whereas the Bespoke Slim is designed for frequent and light cleaning, although they are both vacuum cleaners. We aim to provide customers with product experiences that are tailored to each individual habit and type.
First, we clearly define whether a product corresponds to System Grid or Monument when starting a design. System Grid refers to a design that harmonizes with furniture, space, and architecture. Products that require a specific location, such as a refrigerator or washing machine, corresponds to the System Grid. On the other hand, the Monument is a design that unveils its presence by naturally communicating with the space. Artistically designing home appliances is challenging due to the many requirements that must be met in terms of specific shapes, materials, and parts, but we strive to create a design that harmonizes with space and reveals itself like the Bespoke Cube Air Purifier.
Necessary items were produced exclusively with a designer’s knowledge and intuition when a designer could monopolize information. But now, information and knowledge are open to everyone. Customer perception and standards have become on par with designers, and more and more people are seeking delicate and unique design sensibilities. Designers must research and experiment further to satisfy these customers.
Samsung Electronics designers develop designs by adding their own interpretations to the value of Bespoke design. The section below explains how the designers of each product combined the values of Bespoke design, and what message they want to convey to customers.
Bespoke Cube Air Purifier offers five low saturated colors that give comfort and two types of pattern design, herringbone and stripe, that blend with the straight lines of furniture. This allows users to choose a style that suits their taste or environment. Given that the ideal placement of an air purifier is in the center of a room, we contemplated on how the design could shine from all directions. I believe the value of Bespoke design is reflecting on product experiences according to users’ lifestyles and carefully considering what they are unaware of. We tried to demonstrate that a sustainable design is possible without losing aesthetics despite using a production method that minimizes post-processing.
Bespoke refrigerators have evolved internally and externally to fit users’ lifestyles. The biggest feature of the Bespoke 4-Door Flex™ refrigerator is the Beverage Center. The water dispenser is installed within the door to follow hygienic trends and a preference for a clean exterior. The refrigerator has two dispensers, one that can be used to directly drink filtered water or the other that lets you pour filtered water from a built-in pitcher. In addition to its minimalistic and stylish exterior, the Bespoke 4-Door Flex™ refrigerator is designed to be easily and safely accessible to people of all ages and physical attributes as it is a home appliance used by the entire family. This was a result of deeply contemplating on the needs of diverse individuals when designing a product.
I wanted cleaning to feel like a simple task with the Bespoke Slim, as the people today are concerned about hygiene and cleanliness more than ever. Its design has a lower center of gravity, which places less strain on your wrist when cleaning and can stand on its own. Additionally, the dust bin can be emptied without a mess by simply pushing the handle. The Bespoke Slim provides the experience of a refined product and a personalized strap for a stable grip, which altogether captures the value of Bespoke design that allows users to select the style and color they desire.
Bespoke Jet™ is a home appliance tailored to your taste that embellishes its surroundings. We believe that the value of Bespoke design is creating appliances that are beautiful when placed in the most convenient location for daily use. The Bespoke Jet™ is designed to blend well with the environment, so that it can be placed anywhere nearby and used frequently. It also makes cleaning easier for users by eliminating the hassle of making a trip to emptying the dust bin or changing accessories. These convenient and efficient experiences lead to product satisfaction and trust, and we hope the Bespoke Jet™ is the first item that comes to mind when customers are looking for their next vacuum cleaner.
There are various situations and environments where water is used in the kitchen. Therefore, I deliberated on a water purifier design that allows easy access and use in any situation. The Bespoke Water Purifier divides the functional and usage components. The functional component is placed under the counter and only the faucet is exposed. It features a simple but detailed appearance in neutral tone colors, white, black, and gold, to blend with the space and radiate its presence. We sought to encapsulate the value of Bespoke in our design to help users approach products more conveniently in various situations.
I believe expanding the product experience through both color variety and desired form is the value of Bespoke. The utmost effort was put into both the exterior design and integrated features of the Bespoke ShoeDresser as it was a debuting product of a new home appliance category. It has been designed with curved corners for safety, considering the height is below the eye level of adults and people often walk by it. Its design also harmonizes with any home interior. Users can easily reflect their taste and personality by choosing the color of the panel. In addition, we redesigned the interior structure several times to allow for ergonomic use without damaging shoes.
Bespoke Cube Air Purifier offers five low saturated colors that give comfort and two types of pattern design, herringbone and stripe, that blend with the straight lines of furniture. This allows users to choose a style that suits their taste or environment. Given that the ideal placement of an air purifier is in the center of a room, we contemplated on how the design could shine from all directions. I believe the value of Bespoke design is reflecting on product experiences according to users’ lifestyles and carefully considering what they are unaware of. We tried to demonstrate that a sustainable design is possible without losing aesthetics despite using a production method that minimizes post-processing.
Bespoke Jet™ is a home appliance tailored to your taste that embellishes its surroundings. We believe that the value of Bespoke design is creating appliances that are beautiful when placed in the most convenient location for daily use. The Bespoke Jet™ is designed to blend well with the environment, so that it can be placed anywhere nearby and used frequently. It also makes cleaning easier for users by eliminating the hassle of making a trip to emptying the dust bin or changing accessories. These convenient and efficient experiences lead to product satisfaction and trust, and we hope the Bespoke Jet™ is the first item that comes to mind when customers are looking for their next vacuum cleaner.
Bespoke refrigerators have evolved internally and externally to fit users’ lifestyles. The biggest feature of the Bespoke 4-Door Flex™ refrigerator is the Beverage Center. The water dispenser is installed within the door to follow hygienic trends and a preference for a clean exterior. The refrigerator has two dispensers, one that can be used to directly drink filtered water or the other that lets you pour filtered water from a built-in pitcher. In addition to its minimalistic and stylish exterior, the Bespoke 4-Door Flex™ refrigerator is designed to be easily and safely accessible to people of all ages and physical attributes as it is a home appliance used by the entire family. This was a result of deeply contemplating on the needs of diverse individuals when designing a product.
There are various situations and environments where water is used in the kitchen. Therefore, I deliberated on a water purifier design that allows easy access and use in any situation. The Bespoke Water Purifier divides the functional and usage components. The functional component is placed under the counter and only the faucet is exposed. It features a simple but detailed appearance in neutral tone colors, white, black, and gold, to blend with the space and radiate its presence. We sought to encapsulate the value of Bespoke in our design to help users approach products more conveniently in various situations.
I wanted cleaning to feel like a simple task with the Bespoke Slim, as the people today are concerned about hygiene and cleanliness more than ever. Its design has a lower center of gravity, which places less strain on your wrist when cleaning and can stand on its own. Additionally, the dust bin can be emptied without a mess by simply pushing the handle. The Bespoke Slim provides the experience of a refined product and a personalized strap for a stable grip, which altogether captures the value of Bespoke design that allows users to select the style and color they desire.
I believe expanding the product experience through both color variety and desired form is the value of Bespoke. The utmost effort was put into both the exterior design and integrated features of the Bespoke ShoeDresser as it was a debuting product of a new home appliance category. It has been designed with curved corners for safety, considering the height is below the eye level of adults and people often walk by it. Its design also harmonizes with any home interior. Users can easily reflect their taste and personality by choosing the color of the panel. In addition, we redesigned the interior structure several times to allow for ergonomic use without damaging shoes.
Bespoke design is not just a trend. It’s the beginning of a new paradigm. It depicts the future as a companion that is aligned with our lifestyles. Bespoke design will continue to grow and provide better experiences to people empowering them to choose their own products based on a diverse selection of preferences in appearance, function, usage type, and more.
