old id = 473
Coronavirus Guide: Symptoms, Testing, Treatment, and Economics | WIRED
2019
https://www.wired.com/story/coronavirus-guide-faq-advice

To revist this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
To revist this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
Eve SneiderEverything You Need to Know About the CoronavirusTo revist this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
To revist this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
It’s been wellover a year since the first known case of coronavirus surfaced in China, the threat of the virus overtook normal life stateside, and phrases like “social distancing” and “contact tracing” became lodged in our collective vocabulary. From unemployment statistics to drug trials, new information about this pandemic emerges constantly, and dozens of theories about the disease get advanced or disproven on any given day. As we move into fall, questions loom large about everything fromoff-label vaccinestoreturning to the office. We’ve put together a guide to everything you need to know about this pandemic—be it how to keep your children entertained or how this outbreak is affecting the economy. We’ll be updating it regularly tohelp you keep trackof all aspects of this ever-evolving situation.
Sign up for ourCoronavirus Updatenewsletter for the latest updates, andsubscribe to support our journalism.
Basic BackgroundThe 2019 coronavirusis one of hundreds we know of, and one of seven known to infect humans. These virusesaffect the lungsand also cause fever and sometimes gastrointestinal problems. The World Health Organization declared the coronavirus situation aglobal emergencyin January 2020 and apandemicin mid-March. The pandemic will likely end, but some experts now say it's possible thevirus will become endemicand stick around in a less lethal form.
We don't knowexactly when and how the virus jumped frombatstohumans, thoughefforts are underwayto trace SARS-CoV-2back to its origins.
Themost common symptomsof Covid-19 are dry cough, fever, and shortness of breath. Others include diarrhea andlossofsmellortaste. Some people developsevere blood clots.
The disease is mercurial—fairly mild for someand fatal for others. Scientistscan’t say definitively why, butwomen are less likely to die than men. We know thatolder people, especially those with underlying health issues, aremore at risk. Andchildren fare better than adults, but forbabies, toddlers, and kids with other conditionsthe diseasecan be severe. On thelong road to recovery, people have experienced"brain fog",heart issues, and a spate of otherlong-haul problems.
Social distancingis aboutstaying away from other peopleforlong enough to slow the spreadof the virus. When you do have to be near others, like at the grocery store, while delivering food, or going for a walk, the Centers for Disease Control and Preventionrecommends staying 6 feet away. To enforce this, many states have implementedshelter-in-place ordersat points throughout the pandemic. As places have started toreopen—and rolled back reopening plans—everyone has questionsabout what's safe. You should still avoid travel,especially by airplane, if you haven't been vaccinated. Scientists are still trying to figure out exactlyhow the virus spreads through air,especially in dense cities. To navigate life amidst the pandemic, some public health experts have also madecolor-coded guides. But there's no foolproof way tocalculate risk. The only way to avoid spreading Covid-19 is to follow all of thepublic health guidelineswe have as much as possible.
We now know that you'refar more likelyto get coronavirus from shared air than a shared surface. That said, it's not a bad idea to regularlyclean and disinfect high-touch belongings and surfaceslike doorknobs, remote controls, and counters. One of the most important things you can do, of course, iswash your hands! You’ll wantsoap or disinfectant. You can alsomake your own sanitizerat home.
TheCDC recommends wearing a maskif not doubling upinpublic places where social distancing measures are hard to maintain, especially if you haven't been vaccinated. They're amust-have, and here are a few ofour favorites. When you're stocking up, remember thatnot all masks were created equal. You should layer a disposable surgical mask beneath a fabric face covering. Here are our tips for making a cloth outer mask—all you need area t-shirt and two rubber bands.
All viruses mutateover time, as they spreadfrom person to person. The novel coronavirus is no exception, but recentlyseveral new strainshave emerged that seem to bemore infectious, notably theDelta variant, whichspread rapidly this summerand is now thedominant strainin the US. The good news is that, so far, the vaccines we have are still largely effective at protecting against these new variants. And not all variants arecause for alarm. As scientistsboost genetic sequencingtotrace theseandother mutationsmore effectively and vaccination drives continue, the advent of these strains means it's more important than ever to abide by social distancing guidelines.
Testing, Treatment, and VaccinationAt times, especiallyover the holidayslast winter, many people have operated on the assumption that a negative test means it's safe to gather with others. But as we know fromlast year's superspreader eventat the White House, we need to do more than just test to keep the virus from spreading. And even the test results themselves don't necessarily account for thenuances of the disease.
At the moment, there’s no definitive treatment for Covid-19. Some researchers investigatedchloroquine, the malaria drugtouted by President Trump, but there'snoevidencethat it'sa viable treatment. Others looked into using ananti-influenza drugandCrisprto treat the disease. Theantiviral Remdesivirmay also behelpful, thoughexpensive. The hope is that research will findold drugseffective for treating Covid-19, thereby simplifying thedrug discovery process. All in all, though,Covid-19 drug researchhas proven to bepretty messy.
For the time being,generic drugscould be helpful for those battling Covid-19.
Blood from recovered patientsalsoshowed some promise. Though we don't knowexactlyhow effectiveit is, andgetting it to those in needis a challenge, theFood and Drug Administration has OK'dits emergency use. Researchers are also investigating antibodies from the rare people who seem to havestrong defenses naturally in place. And AI is being used toaccelerate everything from diagnosis to drug discovery. Most of all, it’s important to remember thatfinding treatments takes time, and there area lot of dubious theories circulating online. Whatever you do, pleasedon't try drinking bleach.
In December, the US approved its first two Covid-19 vaccines, from Pfizer-BioNTech andModerna. This was ablazingly fast scientific achievement, all the more so when you consider that both are the first-ever approved vaccines thatuse mRNAto train the immune system to recognize and fight off SARS-CoV-2. Though very few serious adverse reactions have been reported, many people experienceside effects, typically a day or two of feverlike symptoms. The fact that these vaccines were authorized for emergency use could have some bearing on thefate of their ongoing trials. And now that they've been approved for use in adults,teens, andtweens,trials for childrenareongoing. In late February, the FDA also approved a third vaccine, fromJohnson & Johnson. Though itpaused the vaccine's usefor a short time in April due toconcerns about rare blood clots, the shot is now back in use, asits benefits outweigh the risks.
Meanwhile, trials fora number of other vaccinesare ongoing. This is a good thing: We'll needmany vaccinesto inoculate everyone, and it's always possible that vaccines in trials nowmay prove even betterthan the ones we already have. Now that more and more new variants are emerging, research has also begun to figure out how toupdate existing shots, and to discern the effects of these vaccines ondifferent people over time.
Where rollout is concerned, two questions have loomed large: Whatorder should people get the vaccine in, and how can they get vaccinatedas efficiently as possible? Two of the three shots approved for use in the US right now, from Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna, requiretwo dosesand must be stored atvery cold temperatures, two factors that have complicated distribution. There's also the issue of supply. At times, many Americans have haddifficultyfiguring out when they're eligible andscheduling an appointment. Some experts have floated the idea of setting upmass vaccination clinics, but even this wouldn't fully addressissues of equity and access.
Distribution plansdisproportionately favor people with time and internet access, often sideliningthose most in need. On top of all this, there's the importance ofbuilding trustamong thevaccine-hesitant, especially within communities that have historically borne the brunt ofmedical racism. There's also the ongoing issue ofvaccine misinformation. One solution that seems to work:Vaccine lotteries. More and more places are simplymandating shotsas well, particularly ashospitals fill with people who aren't vaccinated. Amid concerns about waning immunity and new variants,immune-suppressed people, and soon health Americans, will have access to third doses, tothe rest of the world's frustration. Even so, for the pandemic totruly end, even vaccinated people need totake precautionsandeveryone worldwidewill needaccess to vaccines.
Whether you’reraising a familyorliving alone, it’s best to isolate at home and keep your space clean. And whether you’resick or healthy, it’s important to look after yourmindandbody.
Epidemiology and TrackingWe know that the virus is passed from person to person when someonecoughs or sneezes.
Germy dustcould also be a disease vector. Outbreaks spreadexponentially at firstbut that rateslows over time, especially ifadditional measuresare taken to flatten the curve. And some researchers are exploring the possibility that the virus could returnseasonallylike thecommon cold.
Flu season was a noneventduring the pandemic, which means that our measures for curbing spread work, and also that [future flu seasons] (https://www.wired.com/story/covid-lockdowns-prevented-other-infections-is-that-good/)could be worsethan we're used to.
Some countries opted forstrict lockdowns. Others, like South Korea, Singapore, and Taiwan, seemed to havesquashed the curveearly on thanks towidespread testing and tracing efforts. Though travelers coming from the US and Europe later spurredan increase of cases, there’s stilla lot for the US to learn. As far as disseminating information,censorshipandmisinformationhave proven to be issuesworldwide.
Tobuild useful modelsandfully understand the coronavirus, we need to knowhow it has spread. Lots of countries are either usingsmartphone appsandlocation datatotrack the spreadof the virus or are working to put a contact tracing system in place. To mitigate concern that this contact tracing would be aninfringement of privacy, companies likeApple and Googlecollaboratedon aBluetooth-based systemthat would track coronavirus andnotify people who have been exposedwithout surveilling users.
Beyond smartphones, some countries andworkplaceshave started usingthermal camerasto detect potential fevers, andwearable devicesandsewage surveillancemay also prove helpful. In some places, the QR code ishaving its moment. And some city and stateofficials are skepticalabout digital tracing,employing thousands of peopleto do the tracing instead. At the federal level, there has been talk of creating anational pandemic prediction agencyto study Covid andget ahead of future pandemics.
As vaccination becomes more widespread, there's also the question of if and how to keep track ofwho has received their shots.
Vaccine passports, or ways to verify immunity, arein the works. But even before many exist, they've already been the source of controversy. Some have also floated plans forregistries and apps.
Staying SaneFromvideo gamestostreaming services, we’re living in the golden age ofdigital entertainment! You cancope with cabin feverbyworking out,meditating, orgetting really into bread bakinglikeeveryone else on the internet. Maybe there's adrive-in movie theaternear you, or you have access to aroof. And if you’re really feeling ambitious, you can alwaysdo your taxes. Whatever you do, promise you'll try to avoiddoomscrolling?Even if you’re lucky enough to beworking from home, staying productiveout of the officeisan adjustment. Even when you do return, office lifewon't be the same. Theright gearand agood internet connectionmake a world of difference. So doesmastering the art of Zoom. Our recommendation:Commit to the home officeandinvest in a standing desk, or even atreadmill desk! It's important toprotect your body.
Staying socialis important for staving offisolationwhen you're sheltering at home. Theright gearcan help, and awell-placed jokeandsense of self-awarenessgo a long way. And if you’re a parent, it’s worth noticing how this may be affecting yourchildorteenagerdifferently. Now that the world is starting to open up, you may be thinking about visiting friends and loved ones, especially if you've been vaccinated: We have tips fortraveling safely, by plane oron the road.
It goes without saying that this pandemic has done a number on everyone's mental health. Here are a few tips for stayingrelaxed and calm,finding a therapistwho works for you during this crazy time, andgetting enough sleep. Especially as the light at the end of the tunnel seems like it's coming into focus, it's important tobe gentle with yourself. And as your world does begin to reopen bit by bit, small tricks and routines canhelp with reentry.
Business and EconomicsAsunemployment ratesanddeath tollsrose in 2020, it was evident that this pandemic was affecting everyone. But the way it hit some of America’s most vulnerable populations—childrenandpatientswithout an internet connectionat home,people without a hometoshelter in,members of the Navajo Nation,incarcerated individuals—illuminates many of thechasms that divide society.
How much you makedetermines how well you're able to prevent getting sick. It's been particularly distressing to see the disease'sdisproportionate impactoncommunities of color, a reality much of the Covid-19 data we do havedoesn't fully reveal.
Churchesandcourtsare two of many institutions that have struggled with theunequal impactof this pandemic. Hot spots have also emerged in poorer, densely populated cities in theglobal south. And even in Silicon Valley,Big Tech's shadow workforceis barely scraping by.
Fromairlinestoinfluencers,everyindustrywill be changed by this pandemic. Those that haveadapted quickly—whether that meanstaking your business onlineor placingrobotson theassembly line—indicate thatembracing technologymay benecessary for survival. Foressential businesses, this crisis has spurred new conversations about workers’ basicprotectionsandbenefits, likesick pay. As some businesses reopen,workers who fear returning face difficult decisions. Frompro sportstopatio dining, everyone is trying to come up with ways to keep patrons andparticipants safe. And creatives are coming up withnew waystomakeandput outtheir work. Tech companies whose employees are all at home havemodified their workplace perksaccordingly. And when those of us working remotely doreturn to the office, it likelywon't look the same.
Some may never go backto the office at all, or they may go back onlysome of the time.
When and how toreopen schoolsfor in-person classes remains a hot topic across the country, especially amidthe spread of the Delta variant. Forstudentsand institutions alike, theswitch to remote learninglast spring wasa challenge.
No one knowsexactly how much of ariskit is to resume in person, anddecisions about reopeninghave been made on a slapdash,case-by-case basis. Many schools have opted for ahybrid modeland some wentfully remote, though thedigital dividemakes this tough for some students. And those school buildings that are open for in-person classes have mulled or adopted new technologies likefacial recognition thermal camerasandimproved ventilation. Parents have been faced with a slew of challenging questions, fromhow to set up a good learning environment at hometowhether or not to pod. Those who chose to start homeschooling now also face questions about whether tosend their kids backinto traditional classrooms.
As for higher education, the American college experience hasn't been anything like usual, whether students are learningin-personoronline. Many institutionsbungledtheir reopenings last fall. But there are some changes that have occurred during the pandemic that could actually make higher educationmore accessibleandinnovativein the long run.
You’ve probably seen pictures ofcar-free city streetsandunpollutedskies, but the pandemic’s effect on climate change hasn’t beenuniformly positive, and thegood changesprobably won't last.
Single-use plasticismaking a comeback, the Trump administrationrolled back emissions regulations, and therenewable energy industry is taking a serious hit. Coronavirus deaths tend to be higher in areas withworse air pollution. Not to mention,dealing with natural disastersis much harder when we're also faced with a pandemic, as we've seen withwildfireandhurricaneseasons.
Urbanists have heralded the pandemic as a potential opportunity toboost small citiesandremake big onesfor the better, prioritizing the experience of pedestrians and bikersover cars, figuring out ways to makebuildings breathe better, andreforming rush hour. Other researchers have noticed that the waysurban crime droppedin 2020 provide important information that could help cities increase safety, and do so more equitably, even after the pandemic. Still, there's no doubt that the pandemic has taken a toll on urban life. One example:Mass transit, the lifeblood of cities like New York, is in serious jeopardy.
Government InterventionsOne of America's many pandemic blunders is the extent to which states have been left to fend for themselves. Last spring, that created confusion as each governorcharted a different pathtowardreopening businesses. And as cases worsened in the winter,piecemeal decisionmakingspelled disaster for some states amid rising Covid cases. To coordinate decisionmaking, states in the Midwest, Northeast, and West Coast formed unprecedentedregional alliances. Some experts said states should also be uniting tofigure out testing, while some states are worked ondeveloping their own contact tracing apps.
On his first day in office, President Biden affirmed that the single priority of his administration is totackle the pandemic, marking what many hope will be a new phase in nationalpandemic policy. Under President Trump, the federal government failed tospeak with a unified voice,denyingthe very realtoll of this pandemicrather than take decisive action to mitigate its effects. Despiteexpert advice to the contrary, the president expressed his eagerness toget people back to work. This came after the White Houseignored warningsdating back years about the threat of a pandemic, and fell short wherepreparednessis concerned, and the president himselfcontracted coronavirus. Agencies like theFDAandCDCalsowoefully mismanaged the situationand politicized what should have been apublic health issue.
More From WIREDContact© 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of ourUser AgreementandPrivacy Policy and Cookie StatementandYour California Privacy Rights.
Wiredmay earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
Ad Choices
