old id = 1371
Project MUSE - The Origins and Formation of the Latino Community in Northeast Ohio, 1900 to 2009
1990
https://doi.org/10.1353%2Fohh.2011.0014

Ohio HistoryIn August 2009, Sonia Sotomayor was confirmed as a Justice on the Supreme Court, making her the first Puerto Rican to sit on the court. For individuals of Latino/Hispanic ancestry, this was a moment of pride and joy. In the course of the nomination and the hearings, members of the Senate and others spoke about her background and accomplishments to demonstrate how the American dream was still possible. The process also brought forward critics and skeptics who focused on particular statements made by the new Justice. During the hearings, we, as a people, were reintroduced to the nation’s largest minority. Yet one issue became clear: as a nation, we are still painfully ignorant about the history of the largest minority group in the United States. If we are to learn about this cultural group, our historical knowledge about the Latino population in the United States has to move away from subspecialized fields within the field of American history and into the mainstream public discourse. Scholars of Latino studies need to do a better job of pushing their scholarship into the larger narrative of our nation. Furthermore, the scholarship about Mexican Americans, Puerto Ricans, Cuban Americans, and other individuals of Latin American background needs to move away from the more traditional geographical isolation that confines the study of certain groups to specific regions (i.e., for Puerto Ricans, the East Coast; for Mexican Americans, the Southwest and California; for Cubans, Miami).
This article promotes a new research agenda for those investigating the history of Latinos or Hispanics in the United States. By recentering the study of Latinos from the traditional areas of investigation into areas that[End Page 112]have been neglected, in this case Ohio, this article searches not to provide answers but to create a series of questions about the history of Latinos. The history of Ohio Latinos should provide scholars with a fertile model for the exploration of historical themes such as patterns of migration and immigration, development of cultural institutions and community organization, involvement of Latinos in local politics, and interethnic relations in the workplace and community. Furthermore, current trends in population growth show that Latinos are moving in large numbers into understudied areas such as the midwestern and southeastern United States. Therefore, a historical understanding of how those older communities adjusted to and dealt with Latino migration can also shed light on current trends.
During the 1990s, Spanish-speaking individuals constituted the fastest-growing portion of America’s migrant population. Though the Latino population in Ohio did not grow as rapidly as that in Florida or California, the rate of change in Ohio does reflect national trends. In the 1980s, Ohio was a state with a solid white majority and a large African American minority. However, a steady shift in the demographic composition of the state began to take place during the 1990s. Between 1990 and 2004, the Latino population grew from 139,000 to 220,000.
1According to the U.S. Census Bureau, 42 percent of the Latino population in Ohio is of Mexican descent, 31 percent is composed of Puerto Ricans, 2 percent is Cubans, and 25 percent is Central/South Americans or “other.”2Puerto Ricans are predominant in northeast Ohio, whereas Mexicans concentrate in the northwest portion of the state; central and southwest Ohio have more diverse populations. There are Latinos residing in each of Ohio’s eighty-eight counties. Latinos are now more visible across the state, working in many sectors of Ohio’s economy. However, many Ohioans mistakenly believe that their presence in the state is a recent phenomenon.
The Latino American Population in Northeast Ohio, 1900s to 1940Immediately after the Cuban-Spanish-American War, Latin Americans, mostly Mexicans and Puerto Ricans, were recruited to fill shortages in the agricultural labor force in the United States and Hawaii. Although census documents do not register Latino Americans residing in Ohio until the[End Page 113]1930s, oral history projects and local histories show Mexican migrants living in Lorain in the years immediately after World War I.
3Mexican Americans are both the largest Latino group in the United States and the oldest. Living in the Southwest before it was annexed by the United States, Mexican residents, both legally and illegally, have long been part of the American labor force. The migration of Mexicans into Ohio was part of a larger migration of this group into the industrial and agricultural areas of the Midwest, where they hoped to capitalize on emerging manufacturing opportunities such as the “meat-packing plants and steel mills in the Chicago area; automobile assembly lines in Detroit; the steel industry in Ohio and Pennsylvania.”4Mexican migrants in Ohio were moved into areas where immigrants from eastern and southwestern Europe and African Americans who were migrating from the South predominated during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Beginning in the late 1910s, Mexicans regularly migrated to northeast Ohio (Lorain and, eventually, Cleveland) in search of jobs. Forced to move from Mexico because of economic necessity or the great political revolution of 1910, migrants found work in Ohio, although many of them thought of themselves as temporary sojourners. Those who migrated to Ohio generally came from families that had been engaged in years of back-and-forth movement that eventually culminated in their settling in the Midwest, though many expected to return to Mexico.
5However, over time Latino American migration into the United States in general and Ohio in particular fell into three distinctive patterns that transformed the transitory character of this migration. First came young single men who hoped to relieve their family’s economic situation back in Latin America. Second came married men who wanted to help their own families by sending money home to their wives; these men wanted eventually to bring their families to live with them. And finally, there were Latinos who arrived in the United States in family groups.
6Latino migration to Ohio consisted mainly of men migrating to send money to their families and of Latinos moving into the state as family units. The first Mexicans to move into Lorain were members of only two or three families. They settled in Lorain in 1921 to work in the gangs of the Baltimore[End Page 114]& Ohio Railroad (B&O). Two years later, a local steel mill—the National Tube Company, an affiliate of US Steel—recruited 1,300 Mexicans from Texas to come to work in the Lorain plants.
7Among the new settlers were the Mendez and Silvia-Tovar families. Between Mexico and Ohio, the Mendez and Silvia-Tovar families had several children, including Frank S. Mendez. Frank was born in Iowa in October 1925 and was baptized in Lorain two months later.
8The timing of the arrival of Frank’s father, Natividad, in Lorain could not have been worse. Lorain was recovering from a major tornado that had leveled part of the city a year earlier. Natividad Mendez started working as a laborer in the blast furnace section of the National Tube Company in December 1925. National Tube’s heavy mill operations were located in south Lorain, separated by the B&O tracks from the rest of the city. South Lorain had the least desirable real estate in town because of its proximity to the mill. During this period, this neighborhood attracted first- and second-generation European immigrant families who depended on the steel mill for a living. In many homes, English was a second language, with the first more likely to be Hungarian, Italian, Russian, Polish, Czech, Lithuanian, Slovak, Romanian, Ukrainian, or Greek.
9During the 1920s, most Mexicans worked at the steel mill’s blast furnace and pipe mills. The prevailing wage for a ten-hour day in the mill was between $4.50 and $5; these daily wages were considerably higher than those paid in Mexico. Mexican immigrants who did not seek work in the steel mill established their own businesses in town. According to one study, in the mid-1920s the colony supported “two grocery stores, two restaurants, three pool halls, two bars, and a shoe repair shop.”10These Mexican-owned businesses coexisted with the commercial ventures owned or run by other ethnic groups associated with work at the mill.
Mexican families arriving in Lorain during the 1920s faced adjustments similar to those confronted by other nationals settling in the region. Though there was a certain level of cultural shock for Mexican families, as well as a certain level of discrimination, the proximity to a large number of eastern Europeans, Italians, and Greeks gave the factory workforce a distinct international flavor, turning south Lorain into a preferred destination for foreign workers. The vast number of outsiders created a demand within the ethnic[End Page 115]communities for agencies that could assist newly arrived fellow countrymen, as well as for places of religious worship and for products from the migrants’ home countries.
11In order to meet some of the social needs the community faced, the Mexican consulate based in Cleveland began to work with Mexican nationals in Lorain to create a welfare organization. Community and Mexican government officials appealed to the immigrants through voluntary associations.
12Mutual aid societies provided aid or benefits to particular groups and were either formally organized or arose ad hoc to meet unique needs of a particular group. In 1928 the Sociedad Mutualista Mexicana (Mexican Mutual Aid Society) was formed to provide various services to the colony. A building on Vine Street, at the heart of the Mexican community, was chosen to serve as the headquarters for the group, and it accommodated an in-house lawyer, a pharmacist, and a doctor. The Sociedad was quite active, and by 1929 membership had grown to 170 members. However, mass layoffs and unemployment brought by the Great Depression hurt membership, and for the next forty years the Sociedad existed with only a handful of active members.
13The growth of the community led not only to the creation of the Sociedad and the establishment of Mexican social and religious organizations but also to an increase in the enrollment of Spanish-speaking students at local schools. Because most Mexican migrants were Catholic, many of the school-age children were enrolled in the parish schools. During the first years after their arrival, Mexican parents enrolled their children in St. Ladislaus, St. Cyril, or Methodious parish schools. A former student recalled, “In the school we were forbidden to speak Spanish, however, they made us learn our prayers in Slovenian and to this day I can still say half of Our Father in Slovenian.”14Many young Mexicans were held back because they were unable to speak English during their first year of school. But not all immigrant students attended Catholic schools; in fact, a large percentage of the Mexican children attended the Lorain public schools. Lorain’s English-speaking residents had learned to adjust to older immigrant groups but did not extend that same accommodation to Mexican or other Spanish-speaking groups. But action by school officials to hold back Mexican students because of their failure to speak English was not unique to this group. While there are countless studies explaining how similar policies were extended to other immigrants[End Page 116]groups across the United States, how Mexican students reacted and dealt with such educational policies still needs to be examined.
15The Mexican colony in Lorain, which started with 1,300 individuals in 1923, grew to more than 2,500 by the end of the decade.
16However, as with today’s Latin American population, the exact number of the community at that time is unknown. Most documents give conflicting reports, which is due to the high mobility of the group. Many Mexican workers and their families came to Lorain for a period of time and then moved on to another work site, only to return several months later. Yet, the core of the colony was beginning to form a community. The growth of this community raised new concerns. For example, in Lorain in the 1930s, Mexican parents, many of whom had never intended to stay in the United States, became alarmed at the level of acculturation (i.e., language, food, styles, customs) that was taking place among their children.
17Clearly, this type of concern was not unique to the Mexican community members, nor was their response. To combat this trend, the colony organized a school to counteract the “American influence” and to promote the Mexicanization of their children. Children of Mexican descent met at the home of a local Mexican play producer to learn the history and customs of Mexico.
18The Mexican colony in Cleveland, unlike the one in Lorain, was small in size. The first group of Mexican migrants, numbering around 600, began to settle in the 1920s on the city’s West Side: from Randall Street to West 52nd Street, between Lorain and Detroit avenues. This area gave the Mexican community easy access to the Flats, where most of the steel mills, and therefore jobs, were located. This was a period of growth for the city of Cleveland, one that provided employment opportunities for new migrant groups.
During the 1920s, Mexicans in Cleveland maintained loose ties with one another. However, the economic crisis of the 1930s and the increased xenophobia resulting from economic tensions prompted them to establish a forum to address mutual problems and to preserve their cultural heritage. In 1932, under the leadership of Félix Delgado, the Club Azteca was founded. The club became the center of the community, providing residents with a venue for organized cultural events. However, during those years the club lacked a physical home, and its members took turns hosting meetings. By[End Page 117]1945 the club was officially incorporated, and in 1951 its members were able to accumulate enough savings and donations to acquire a building on Detroit Avenue, where the club still resides today.
19The onset of the Depression saw a backlash against Spanish-speaking migrants and the deportation of some Mexicans. The U.S. government responded to the growing resentment toward “foreigners” by working out a deal with Mexico to repatriate indigent Mexicans. The deportations not only broke up families, but they also trampled the rights of U.S. citizens. The antiforeigner campaign led to the deportation of Mexican children who, born in the United States, were American citizens. According to Leobardo Estrada, half of those who were repatriated were actually born in the United States.
20The deportations and the job losses led to a decline in the number of Mexicans residing in northeast Ohio.
Latinos in Postwar OhioWorld War II changed the economic situation in the United States. The war created an increased demand for U.S. food and manufacturing products, which meant more workers, more jobs. The need for cheap labor coupled with the shortage of workers due to the draft, meant that American businesses were forced to turn to Mexico and Puerto Rico for labor. Mexican workers returned to Cleveland and obtained jobs at the steel mills. And new arrivals found that their compatriots had created an infrastructure to help them adjust to living in the city and in the United States.
Mexican and Puerto Rican workers came to Ohio under the Bracero Program, a U.S.-Mexican agreement to supply temporary agricultural workers that lasted from 1942 to 1964, or as part of a state-sponsored industrialization work program and antipoverty programs initiated by Rexford G. Tugwell, governor of Puerto Rico from 1942 to 1946. The Bracero Program (from the Spanish wordbrazo,meaning “arm”) was a series of laws and agreements initiated by an August 1942 exchange of diplomatic notes between the United States and Mexico for the importation of temporary contract laborers from Mexico to the United States.
21Under the Bracero Program, the United States[End Page 118]paid transportation costs for Mexicans to come to the United States on labor contracts. The program was not canceled with the American victory in Europe and the Pacific, since the end of the war, and the return of men to the U.S. workforce, did not diminish the demand for farm or factory laborers. On the contrary, the robust postwar economy created a need for even more workers.
The Puerto Rican government during the early postwar period created development projects and also included the need for Puerto Ricans to migrate to the United States. Operation Bootstrap, Puerto Rico’s plan for the industrialization of the island, originated with the populist government of Luis Muñoz Marín and the Popular Democratic Party. The success of Operation Bootstrap rested on two incentives: industrialization by invitation or relocations of U.S. corporations and a cheap Puerto Rican labor pool that was educated and Americanized. But Operation Bootstrap’s success also brought an increase in the number of displaced rural farm workers who were not hired at the manufacturing level. To relieve the unemployment rolls, the Puerto Rican government, working with American officials and businessmen, began a series of migration projects.
22During the early postwar period, when Ohio farmers and manufacturers turned to Mexico and Puerto Rico as sources for laborers, Puerto Rican migrants dominated the new Latino diaspora in Ohio. Tapping Puerto Rico for cheap workers was not new; it was a well-established practice that had begun in 1898, when the Caribbean island became a U.S. territory.
The largest influx of Puerto Ricans to the U.S. mainland began right after the war. The demand for Puerto Rican laborers coincided with a series of development projects implemented on the island. These projects were intended to make Puerto Rico the showcase for American capitalism for the newly decolonized areas of the third world. However, the new state-sponsored industrialization programs led to the reduction of agricultural jobs on the island and to increased unemployment. To alleviate the unemployment rolls, the government began to collaborate with labor agencies in the United States to find jobs for workers. The architect of this migratory policy in Puerto Rico was Clarence Senior, who organized and supervised the massive emigration from Puerto Rico to the United States. Invited to teach at the University of Puerto Rico by its president, Jaime Benitez, Senior was introduced to the[End Page 119]political leadership on the island. He rapidly became part of a special circle of scholars and technocrats advising Luis Muñoz Marín, president of the Puerto Rican Senate, and the island’s governors.
23Senior called for the creation of an emigration office to recruit workers and to provide migrants with information on job openings, training, transportation, settlement, and insurance.
24He argued that the new office would take over the former government agencies that had previously handled the migration of Puerto Ricans to the United States. In 1948 the Puerto Rican Labor Department created the Bureau of Employment and Migration, which in 1951 became the Migration Division.
25Once the plan was presented by Senior and Teodoro Moscoso, the director of Operation Bootstrap, Muñoz Marín accepted the proposal but argued that it not be considered a permanent solution to Puerto Rico’s economic, social, and population problems. He wanted it only to be a temporary measure offered as a relief to the surplus population and growing unemployment rolls that were causing the dismantling of the agricultural economy of the island.
26Part of the Migration Division’s job was to create publications about the life, laws, and culture of the American people. To help U.S. employers, the Migration Division also developed brochures explaining and introducing Puerto Rican culture to these businesses. In the end, U.S. employers recruited Puerto Ricans as low-wage workers for certain sectors of the economy (agriculture, auto industry). Puerto Rican officials in the Migration Division also used contract labor to push islanders into settling outside New York City. As a result, Puerto Ricans began to settle along the East Coast and in the Midwest.
27At the end of World War II, the National Tube Company announced a multimillion dollar expansion. The company also discovered a major flaw in its operations: competition for jobs had led to an unacceptable turnover rate at the mill. To create a stable workforce, the company began to hire contract workers. The first group of Puerto Rican contract workers arrived in Lorain in 1947. The company hailed this experiment as a success. Negotiations among the Puerto Rican government, the National Tube Company, and the workers were handled by S. G. Friedman Labor Agency of Philadelphia. Friedman was[End Page 120]familiar with Puerto Rico because his father was a veteran of the war of 1898 who had helped in the organization of Puerto Rico’s insular police. More than 80 percent of those selected for jobs at the Lorain mill came from the agricultural communities outside of Lares, Utuado, Caguas, and Jayuya.
28This was a calculated decision on the part of Friedman’s agency and the Puerto Rican government. As Operation Bootstrap expanded, agricultural jobs in these Puerto Rican areas began to decrease. Eventually, migrants from the coastal sugar-producing regions began to sign contracts to work in the United States. With this increased emigration from the Puerto Rican coast, Cleveland experienced an influx of islanders from Juana Diaz and Yauco as well as from the mountain town of San Lorenzo.
Friedman had a set of criteria for selecting contract workers to come to Ohio. During interviews, the labor agency weeded out Afro–Puerto Ricans and those who could not read or write in Spanish. By weeding out Puerto Ricans who were darker, or black, and those who could not read or write, Friedman was selectively reconstructing the workers as white or of Spanish ancestry. Within the American imagination, the blackness of the Caribbean was partially to blame for the backwardness and lack of progress. Friedman, therefore, was expunging the African out of the Puerto Rican. Those selected by Friedman’s agency were brought to San Juan, where they boarded DC-3 airplanes at Isla Grande Airport. From October 1947 to June 1948, close to 500 Puerto Rican men arrived in Lorain to work at the National Tube Company. According to oral histories, the first of the Puerto Rican workers arrived without winter clothing, even though Friedman claimed that he had provided all the men with cold weather clothes.
29To help the workers, the company gave them work uniforms on credit and assigned each of them a room in the company barracks.
The arrival of Puerto Ricans in Lorain went unnoticed by the residents of the city until an article appeared in theLorain Journal.
30City officials and the management at the mill reassured apprehensive residents that the workers had been carefully screened. During this period, most of the Puerto Rican workers were depicted as hardworking, law abiding, decent, shy, and eager to learn American ways. Furthermore, according to theLorain Journal,Puerto Rican workers kept to themselves in south Lorain, rarely venturing into other parts of the city.
31At the time most residents of Lorain had never seen a Puerto Rican.
[End Page 121]As Puerto Rican workers at National Tube gained the reputation of being hardworking and dependable, other companies in the Midwest began to follow the Lorain experiment. In 1948 Carnegie-Illinois Steel of Gary, Indiana, hired Friedman’s agency to recruit Puerto Ricans for its company.
32In 1950 Ferro Machine and Foundry of Cleveland hired six Puerto Ricans as an experiment. Like the Lorain officials, the management in Cleveland was so impressed by the workers’ performance that it increased the number of Puerto Rican hires to 100.
33Although most of the immigrant workers did not originally intend to stay in Ohio, many changed their minds and sent for their families and friends to join them. By 1955 the Cleveland Nationalities Directory reported 1,500 Puerto Rican residents living in the city.
34The majority of Puerto Ricans who came to Cleveland during this period settled on the city’s East Side—around Hough, Lexington, and Superior avenues. The new migrants were attracted to these areas because of their proximity to Our Lady of Fatima Catholic Church and St. Paul’s Shrine. Trinitarian priests who spoke Spanish led these two Catholic churches. In 1954 the Cleveland Diocese established a Spanish Catholic mission where masses were celebrated in Spanish. However, local parishioners, mostly Eastern European, were opposed to Spanish masses and did not welcome the new members of the parish community. The Cleveland Diocese also established a Spanish Catholic mission for Mexicans in Lorain with the opening of the Sacred Heart Chapel on Vine Avenue in 1952. The growth of the Puerto Rican population in Cleveland and Lorain also led to the emergence of several Pentecostal churches, the first of which was the Spanish Assembly of God, on West 11th Street in Cleveland, in 1952.
35Beyond their cultural resources, the accessibility of financing and housing shaped the material living conditions of the Latino communities of northeast Ohio. Much like other immigrants, the majority of Puerto Ricans and Mexicans in the region were on the lower end of the socioeconomic scale.
36During the late 1940s and early 1950s, housing conditions for Puerto Rican workers in Lorain were abysmal. Most of the workers and their families lived in squalid conditions, placing the community at risk of disease and death. The lack of accessible housing was due to the refusal of English-speaking individuals of non–Eastern European ancestry to have Puerto Ricans as neighbors. Clearly, racial/linguistic and cultural prejudices[End Page 122]played roles in the refusal of these Americans to rent or sell to the Spanish-speaking workers. To resolve the housing crisis, members of Lorain’s Puerto Rican colony sent their families back to the island; many were not reunited until the early 1960s. Census records show that the Puerto Rican colony was mostly male and between the ages of twenty-five and forty-nine.
37During the late 1950s, Puerto Rican men began to buy and renovate old houses along Vine Avenue. Pooling their resources and skills, these men would fix up the houses and sell them to friends, who would then bring their families to Lorain. As a growing community, Puerto Ricans began not only to buy residences and permanently settle in Lorain but also to create organizations that advocated on behalf of their community.
Community groups, whether they were founded by Mexicans or Puerto Ricans, increasingly focused on the educational, economic, and political advancement of their community in the United States rather than in their nations. For the Puerto Rican communities in Lorain and Cleveland, as in New York, the most common form of association was the hometown club. Most of these clubs called themselvesausentes(the absent ones) orhijos(sons or daughters) of a town back on the island.
38During the postwar period many organizations and hometown clubs were created to provide shelter, jobs, financial help, and other benefits to their members. According to Puerto Rican government officials, these clubs offered “enormous attractions for the Puerto Rican. Moreover, they provide a means of expression for social and cultural activities in which the entire family can participate.”39The clubs served as the primary agencies for social services during the 1950s.
In northeast Ohio, one of the first Puerto Rican organizations was the Puerto Rican Welfare League, established in late 1947. As an organization, the Welfare League’s main role was to address the social needs of the community. Several other self-help organizations established during the 1950s addressed the community’s social and cultural needs. In 1956 all Puerto Rican organizations in Lorain came together to create El Hogar Puertorriqueño (Puerto Rican Home). El Hogar was a sign of the community’s political, economic, and cultural strength. It hosted community celebrations such as weddings, baptism, quinceañeras (coming-of-age celebrations for girls when they turn fifteen), wakes, and political events, including a visit by Puerto Rico’s newly elected governor, Luis Muñoz Marín, in 1959. El Hogar[End Page 123]also became the cultural epicenter of the community, hosting concerts by artists such as Daniel Santos and Lorain’s own Trio Puerto Rico.
40In Cleveland, the first Puerto Rican club was the Sons of Borinquen, founded in 1951 by Alfonso Romero, Tiofilo Virola, and Pedro Ilerio. The Sons of Borinquen helped people with job referrals, offered welfare and educational programs, and helped members secure death benefits. Its members also functioned as cultural brokers for the new arrivals. The club closed in 1962 because of financial problems. In 1959 the Hijos de Juana Diaz (Sons of Juana Diaz) was founded to encourage the social gathering of migrants from the town of Juana Diaz. This was followed by other social clubs, such as La Casa Puertorriqueña (Puerto Rican Home), which opened in 1969 with the purpose of promoting Latino youth participation in sports; the Sociedad Deportiva de San Lorenzo (Saint Lorenzo Sports Society), which promoted sports as well as social events; El Paraiso Club, which was incorporated in 1973 for civic, social, and sports activities; and Club Yabucoa, whose membership was mostly migrants from the town of Yabucoa. Three of these organizations—Juana Diaz, San Lorenzo, and Yabucoa—are still active and serve the community today.
41The 1970s led not only to the creation of social clubs in northeast Ohio but also to the establishment of the Puerto Rican Friendly Day, an annual parade that brought together Latinos from the region. This annual parade commemorating Puerto Rico’s establishment as a commonwealth and its constitution was held every July in downtown Cleveland. Advertisements in the program guides for Puerto Rican Friendly Day between 1970 and 1975 show a vibrant and expanding community42that had grown to support Latino car and home repair businesses, grocery stores, restaurants, travel agencies, translation services, and legal services. Toward the late 1970s, however, the overall decline of the U.S. economy affected these businesses, and the program guides reflect that with a decline in advertisements for Latino-owned businesses, social service centers, and social clubs.
43In the postwar period, Latinos in Ohio began to exert some influence politically. Puerto Ricans in Ohio had historically voted Democratic. However,[End Page 124]in 1956 El Hogar became involved in the election of the Lorain County sheriff by supporting the Republican challenger. After years of repression and harassment by the local police and amid tensions arising from being perceived as a cultural threat by the local community, reflecting the periodic anti-immigrant sentiment that plagued the United States during the twentieth century, the Puerto Rican community developed a strategy that involved voting as a bloc for the Republican candidate in order to upset Lorain’s powerful Democratic machine. The Republican candidate for sheriff, Vernon M. Smith, won with the support of the Puerto Rican community, and, in a show of gratitude, the sheriff began to address racial tensions developing between the Puerto Rican community and the police department. The Democratic Party, realizing that the Puerto Rican community had become a strong voting bloc in Lorain, made a point of having its candidates stop at the El Hogar during campaigns. Eventually, Evelio Rosario, a Puerto Rican Democrat, was elected to the city council in 1963, but although the experience of the 1956 election left a long-lasting imprint on the community, Latinos have been slow in reaching political office in Ohio.
44During the late 1950s, changes in the Puerto Rican community in Cleveland also began to shape its interactions with the rest of the city. The community began migrating en masse from the East Side to the neighborhoods of the near West Side. The deterioration of the inner cities and a desire to be closer to the industrial Flats area prompted the migration. By 1995, two-thirds of Greater Cleveland’s Puerto Ricans lived on the West Side, from West 5th to West 65th streets between Detroit and Clark avenues. During this period, as the community grew and the general workforce stabilized, recruitment of Puerto Rican laborers dropped off. Despite this, Puerto Ricans continued to move into Cleveland, which led to increased tension and intolerance.
45Puerto Ricans, who were once hailed by employers and city officials as good, dependable, quiet, and hardworking, were now described by newspapers as uneducated, “too Roman Catholic,” threatening, and Communist.
46In response, the Latino community in Cleveland, much like the one in Lorain, developed institutions and organizations to protect and advocate for their rights. In 1956 the Puerto Rican Department of Labor opened an office of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico in the downtown Arcade. The purpose of the office was to regulate migrant contracts and working conditions, to interview and refer Puerto Ricans for jobs, and to offer general[End Page 125]assistance to Puerto Ricans in need. However, during the 1960s community groups began to challenge the island-centered and paternalistic control of the government officials and began to focus on developing its own self-help efforts, technical associations, child care programs, bilingual education, financial assistance for small businesses, and community affairs. In 1966 the creation of the Spanish American Committee (SAC) marked a departure by shifting attention to the needs and aspirations of mainland or Cleveland-born Puerto Ricans. Louis Delgado, of the Commonwealth office, and Chico Cara, of the Cleveland Federation, organized the SAC for Community Planning. SAC’s aim was to serve the whole Spanish-speaking community. Its mission during the 1960s and 1970s was to assist high school students with college applications and job training and to bring Puerto Rican teachers into the Cleveland public schools. Likewise, the provision of day care and drug prevention services and the creation of a credit union and a veteran outreach program were also essential parts of SAC’s mission to serve the community. By the 1990s, SAC was concerned with stabilizing and strengthening Latino families. Furthermore, because its clientele often spoke little or no English and had significant educational limitations, this organization established English as a second language classes for adults in hopes of improving employment rates. Currently the services provided by SAC include social services, a day care center, employment and housing services, educational programs, and paralegal services. In addition, SAC serves as a center for Latino social interaction and communication.
47In the 1980s, a new generation of agencies sprung up in northeast Ohio. In 1983 community leaders Luis Martínez and Al López established Esperanza Inc. to promote education, provide tutoring services for students, and help the local school districts understand the needs of Latino youth.
48Today this organization serves over 800 students and has more than seventy volunteers. The focus of Esperanza Inc. continues to be education; it offers scholarship, reading, youth leadership, and stay-in-school programs.
49The 1980s and 1990s brought new challenges and opportunities for Ohio’s Latinos. During the 1980s, a new generation of Latinos, most of whom were born in Ohio or other U.S. states, began to form new cultural institutions to promote and protect their heritage. And many of them took political and business leadership positions in Ohio’s larger cities, such as Toledo, Cleveland,[End Page 126]Youngstown, and Lorain. In Cleveland during this decade, the Julia de Burgos Cultural Center opened under the leadership of Natividad Pagan and Daisy Rivera. The maintenance of a Latino culture throughout the state came to depend on these sorts of organizations.
Latinos in Ohio TodaySince the mid-1990s, Ohio has experienced significant Latino migration. The boom in Latino migration, as in the rest of the nation, is driven by job opportunities in the United States and high birth rates in Latin American countries. Unlike previous migrations into Ohio, today’s Latinos are forging communities outside of the northeastern part of the state. Ohio counties that have experienced a significant Latino migration recently are Wayne, Holmes, Stark, Tuscarawas, Ashtabula, Lake, Lucas, Franklin, Delaware, and Butler. Latinos are now part of Ohio’s new workforce and are finding jobs in the construction, agriculture, food processing, and service industries. Recent Latino migration to Tuscarawas County has been predominantly Guatemalan. Coming principally from Huehuetenango, Totonicapán, and El Quiche, these immigrants often speak native Mayan languages, including K’ichee’, Awakateko, Q’anjob’al, and Mam.
50The rise in Latino migration to different areas of the state has prompted reaction from the preexisting communities. As in the rest of the nation, illegal migration has moved to the forefront of politics in Ohio. During 2006 the Ohio General Assembly, controlled at the time by the Republican Party, introduced the Illegal Alien Enforcement Act. If this legislation had been passed, it would have given “the state patrol and local police the power to arrest illegal migrants solely for their presence.”51The bill would also have blocked adult migrants in the state illegally from receiving any public benefits. Latino organizations across the state protested the proposed legislation, and Rubén Herrera of the national Latino Leadership Initiative appeared at a hearing before the Ohio Commission on Hispanic/Latino Affairs to protest the Republican plan.
Local reactions to Latino immigration have attracted national media attention. On June 19, 2006,All Things Considered,a National Public Radio show, aired a program about the actions of Richard Jones, a Butler County sheriff who billed the federal government for the expenses his office incurred[End Page 127]by incarcerating undocumented workers. Jones led raids at companies known for hiring illegal workers and in 2006 began a media campaign warning businesses and migrants with the slogan, “You know who you are, and we are coming.”52Frightened by Sheriff Jones’s tactics, many Latinos have been unwilling to call the police in cases of emergency, and others have stopped patronizing Butler County Latino businesses, such as the Taqueria Mercado.
Yet, despite these attempts at criminalization and marginalization, Ohio’s Latino population has begun to impact the state’s political and economic landscape as well as introduce its languages and cultures to a larger population. Cultural crossover has also taken place in the retail sector as more grocery stores are selling Latino foods or products. Latino music has crossed over to the mainstream, and in all the large cities of the state it is now common to have bars or clubs that are entirely dedicated to Latin music and dance or that have at least one Latin night per week. Latino migration is so pervasive that for influential groups in the state of Ohio, Latinos represent a blessing and, at the same time, present a challenge.
The Future of Ohio Latino HistoryThroughout the past 100 years, a steady migration of people of Latin American ancestry has made its way to the United States. Whether escaping political turmoil in the their homelands, searching for better economic conditions, or finding themselves incorporated into the U.S. territorial border, the history of these individuals still needs to be recollected and written in many parts of our nation.
Since the 1970s, a generation of historians and other academics influenced by and schooled in the struggle for civil rights began expanding our historical knowledge by focusing on the lives of Latinos. By focusing on the different aspects (labor, gender, national connections, racial views), scholars of that generation challenged the demeaning and most often monolithic interpretations of the Latino experience. Yet, this scholarship has tended to promote primarily the reconstruction of Latino experiences.
53During the[End Page 128]past decade, trends in Latino historiography have moved toward the premise that Latinos belong to Spanish American history as well as to American history. This shift follows the methodological approach, which contends that borderlands transcend the geopolitical, as well as academic, boundaries. Therefore, current research reflects an incorporation of multilingual, multicultural, and interdisciplinary perspectives and analytical categories based on migration experience, labor, social class, gender, identity, and place of birth. The new directions taken by scholars focusing on Latinos explore the evolution of Latino culture from the perspective of Latinos as they adapt, resist, and collaborate in the formation of their communities and are historically placed in the fabric of this nation.
54This article calls for scholars to begin seeking out and then writing the history of Ohio Latinos. As a field, while Latino history has composed a rich narrative of the history of this group in specific regions of our nation, we still are largely unaware of the contributions Latinos have made in states such as Ohio. As this article demonstrates, the experiences of Latinos in northeast Ohio reflect Latino history in general. The process of migration into the region and the struggles with language, schools, housing, and work clearly demonstrate the collective Latino historical experience. Yet, to conceptualize Latino history as just one experience leads to the homogenization of this group. By exploring Latino history at the regional level as well as through a thematic point of view, new contributions will shed light on hidden histories and processes of community formation across our nation. Failing to incorporate Latinos into the history of Ohio will exclude thousands of individual histories and, in the end, produce a history that denies Latino workers, grassroots activists, professionals, young people, soldiers, and local politicians recognition of their many and varied contributions to the state.
[End Page 129]José O. Solá is an assistant professor of Latin American and Caribbean history at Cleveland State University. He specializes in nineteenth- and twentieth-century Caribbean history, with a particular focus on colonial studies, immigration, race and history, and memory.
Footnotes1.
U.S. Census Bureau, “We the People: Hispanics in the United States” (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Commerce, 2000).
2.
U.S. Census Bureau, “The Hispanic Population in the United States: March 2002” (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Commerce, 2002).
3.
See Frank Mendez,You Can’t Be Mexican, You Talk Just Like Me(Kent, Ohio: Kent State Univ. Press, 2005).
4.
Leobardo F. Estrada, F. Chris García, Reynaldo Flores Macía, and Lionel Maldonado, “Chicanos in the United States: A History of Exploitation and Resistance,”Daedalus110 (1981): 113.
5.
In his autobiography, Frank Mendez explains how his father and the rest of his family migrated out of Mexico during the revolution. See Mendez,You Can’t Be Mexican,ch. 1.
6.
George J. Sánchez,Becoming Mexican American: Ethnicity, Culture, and Identity in Chicano Los Angeles, 1900–1945(New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1993), 42.
7.
Mendez,You Can’t be Mexican,15–17.
8.
Ibid., 17; Frank Jacinto,The Emergence of the Hispanic Community in Lorain, Ohio,rev. ed. (Cleveland: Western Reserve Historical Society, 2001), 1–2.
9.
To see how Mexican immigrants interacted with other ethnic and racial groups, see Vicki L. Ruiz,Cannery Women, Cannery Lives: Mexican Unionization and the California Food Processing Industry, 1930–1950(Albuquerque: Univ. of New Mexico Press, 1981).
10.
Robert W. O’Brien, “The Mexican Colony of South Lorain, Ohio: An Exploratory Study” (master’s thesis, Oberlin College, 1931), 28.
11.
For a description of the origins of the Mexican American community of Lorain, see O’Brien, “The Mexican Colony of South Lorain,” and MacKenzie K. L. Moore, “‘Unidos luchar por la causa de todos’: A Social Geography of Puerto Ricans in Lorain, Ohio 1947–1955” (honors thesis, Oberlin College, 2002).
12.
Sánchez,Becoming Mexican American,ch. 3.
13.
See Jacinto,The Emergence of the Hispanic Community in Lorain.
14.
Ibid., 4.
15.
See O’Brien, “The Mexican Colony of South Lorain”; Jacinto,The Emergence of the Hispanic Community in Lorain;and Eugenio Rivera, “The Puerto Rican Colony of Lorain, Ohio,”Centio de Estudios Puertoriqueños2 (spring 1987): 11–21. There is a need for further historical studies that examine in detail the expansion of the Mexican colony in Lorain, especially regarding school relations, religion, and community development.
16.
See O’Brien, “The Mexican Colony of South Lorain,” 34.
17.
See Vicki Ruiz, “South by Southwest: Mexican-American and Segregated Schooling, 1900–1950,”Magazine of History14 (winter 2001): 23–27.
18.
O’Brien, “The Mexican Colony of South Lorain,” 34–35.
19.
Nicholas J. Zentos and Wendy Marley, “Hispanic Community,” inThe Encyclopedia of Cleveland History,http://ECH.case.edu/ech-cgi/article.pL?id+HC5. This website does not provide the primary documentation for this information. Clearly, further study and archival investigation is needed to obtain a better picture of the emergence and establishment of the Mexican American community in Cleveland.
20.
See Estrada, García, Macía, and Maldonado, “Chicanos in the United States”; and Sánchez,Becoming Mexican American,ch. 4.
21.
James A. Sandos and Harry E. Cross, “National Development and International Labour Migration: Mexico 1940–1965,”Journal of Contemporary History18 (Jan. 1983): 43–60. Also see Sánchez,Becoming Mexican American.
22.
Marcia Rivera, “The Development of Capitalism in Puerto Rico and the Incorporation of Women into the Labor Force,” inThe Puerto Rican Woman,ed. Edna Acosta Belén (Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 1986), 30–45; Arturo Morales Carrión,Puerto Rico: A Political and Cultural History(New York: W. W. Norton, 1983), 256–307; Carlos E. Santiago, “The Changing Role of Migration in Puerto Rican Economic Development: Perspectives from Past and a Look to the Future,” inThe Commuter Nation: Perspectives on Puerto Rican Migration,ed. Carlos A. Torre, Hugo Rodríguez Vecchini, and William Burgos (Río Piedras: Editorial de la Universidad de Puerto Rico, 1994), 171–72.
23.
Michael Lapp, “Managing Migration: The Migration Division of Puerto Rico and Puerto Ricans in New York City, 1948–1968” (Ph.D. diss., John Hopkins University, 1997), 71–89.
24.
Clarence Senior,Puerto Rican Emigration(Río Piedras: Social Research Centers, University of Puerto Rico, 1947).
25.
See Jorge Duany,The Puerto Rican Nation of the Move: Identities on the Island and in the United States(Chapel Hill: Univ. of North Carolina Press, 2002), 169.
26.
A. W. Maldonado,Teodoro Moscoso and Puerto Rico’s Operation Bootstrap(Gainesville: Univ. of Florida Press, 1997); “A New Puerto Rico Shows Off,”Life,Jan. 24, 1949, 19–27.
27.
John P. Fitzpatrick,Puerto Rican Americans: The Meaning of Migration to the Mainland(Englewood Cliff, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1987), 39–40.
28.
Rivera, “The Puerto Rican Colony of Lorain,” 12.
29.
For issues of race in the Caribbean and American visions of the region, see Louis A. Pérez Jr.,On Becoming Cuban: Identity, Nationality, and Culture(Chapel Hill: Univ. of North Carolina Press, 1999). Rivera, “The Puerto Rican Colony of Lorain,” 12.
30.
“Arrive by Plane for Mill Jobs,”Lorain Journal,Feb. 6, 1948.
31.
Ibid.
32.
Ibid.
33.
Zentos and Marley, “Hispanic Community”; “Discounts Talks of Puerto Rican Problem in U.S.,”Cleveland Press,May 6, 1955.
34.
See Zentos and Marley, “Hispanic Community.”35.
Ibid.; “Discounts Talks of Puerto Rican Problem in U.S.”36.
Carmen Teresa Whalen and Víctor Vázquez-Hernández, ed.,The Puerto Rican Diaspora: Historical Perspectives(Philadelphia: Temple Univ. Press, 2005).
37.
Rivera, “The Puerto Rican Colony of Lorain,” 15–16.
38.
See Duany,The Puerto Rican Nation on the Move,173–74; Virginia Sánchez-Korrol,From Colonia to Community: The Puerto Rican in New York City(Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 1994), 127.
39.
Quoted in Duany,The Puerto Rican Nation on the Move,174; Estado Libre Asociado de Puerto Rico, Departamento del Trabajo, División de Migración, informe anual, 1957–59, p. 91, Archivo Historico ce la Migración Puertorriqueña, Centro de Estudios Puertorriqueños, Hunter College, New York, N.Y.
40.
Programs, “Puerto Rican Friendly Day,” 1970–76, 1981–82, Western Reserve Historical Society Archives Library, Cleveland; Zentos and Marley, “Hispanic Community”; Karl Bonutti and George Prpic,Selected Ethnic Communities of Cleveland: A Socio-Economic Study(Cleveland: Cleveland State University, 1977).
41.
Zentos and Marley, “Hispanic Community”; Sánchez-Korrol,From Colonia to Community,189; “Bon Voyage, Yabucoa Nine Taking Quite a Trip,”Cleveland Press,Sept. 22, 1976; “Fire Destroy Club,” ibid., Aug. 13, 1980.
42.
Programs, “Puerto Rican Friendly Day.”43.
While researching the materials at the Western Reserve Historical Society, I noticed that within the program guides for the Puerto Rican Friendly Day there was a decrease in the purchase of ads by Latino-owned businesses.
44.
“Discounts Talks of Puerto Rican Problem in U.S.,”Cleveland Press,May 6, 1955; “Bon Voyage, Yabucoa Nine Taking Quite a Trip,” ibid., Sept. 22, 1976; and “Fire Destroy Club,” ibid., Aug. 13, 1980; Rivera, “The Puerto Rican Colony of Lorain.”45.
Bonutti and Prpic,Selected Ethnic Communities of Cleveland.
46.
“Discounts Talks of Puerto Rican Problem in U.S.,”Cleveland Press,May 6, 1955; Bonutti and Prpic,Selected Ethnic Communities of Cleveland.
47.
For the information of this section, see Zentos and Marley, “Hispanic Community.” Also see the website of the Spanish American Committee,http://www.spanishamerican.org/.
48.
Interview with Al López, summer 2006, Cleveland State University. I thank Al for clarifying the role different individuals played in the history of the region’s Puerto Rican and Latino communities as well as the evolution of community organizations.
49.
Esperanza, Inc.,http://www.esperanzainc.com.
50.
“Latinos Rattled by Ohio Sheriff ’s Mission,” National Public Radio,All Things Considered,June 19, 2006,http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?id=5478989; “The Hispanic Population in the United States: March 2002,” U.S. Department of Commerce,http://usa.usembassy.de/etexts/soc/hispanicpop2002.pdf.
51.
“Latinos Rattled by Ohio Sheriff’s Mission.”52.
Ibid.
53.
Sarah Deutsch,No Separate Refuge: Culture, Class, and Gender on an Anglo-Hispanic Frontier in the American Southwest, 1880–1940(New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1987); Ruiz,Cannery Women;Juan Flores,Divided Borders: Essays on Puerto Rican Identity(Houston, Tex.: Arte Público Press, 1991); Mario T. Garcia,Mexican Americans: Leadership, Ideology, and Identity, 1930–1960(New Haven, Conn.: Yale Univ. Press, 1989); Richard Griswold del Castillo,La Familia: Chicano Families in the Urban Southwest, 1948 to the Present(Notre Dame, Ind.: Univ. of Notre Dame Press, 1984); Ramón Gutiérrez,When Jesus Came, the Corn Mothers Went Away: Marriage, Sexuality, and Power in New Mexico, 1500–1846(Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Univ. Press, 1991); History Task Force, Centro de Estudios Puertorriqueños,Migration Under Capitalism: The Puerto Rican Experience(New York: Monthly Review Press, 1979); Alejandro Portes and Robert L. Bach,Latino Journey: Cuban and Mexican Immigrants in the United States(Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 1985); Gerald E. Poyo,“With All and for the Good of All”: The Emergence of Popular Nationalism in the Cuban Communities of the United States, 1848–1898(Durham, N.C.: Duke Univ. Press, 1989); Clara E. Rodríguez,Puerto Ricans: Born in the U.S.A.
(Boston: Unwyn Hyman, 1989); Guadalupe San Miguel,“Let Them All Take Heed”: Mexican Americans and the Campaign for Educational Equality in Texas, 1910–1981(Austin: Univ. of Texas Press, 1987); and David J. Weber,The Spanish Frontier in North America(New Haven, Conn.: Yale Univ. Press, 1992).
54.
See Vicky Ruiz, “Latinos in the United States,”Magazine of History(OAH) 10 (winter 1996): 3–4.
Previous ArticleToledo Dentist Charles Betts and the Health Crusade Against AluminumNext Article“Spur Up Your Pegasus”: Family Letters of Salmon, Kate, and Nettie Chase, 1844–1873(review)ShareSocial MediaRecommendFootnotesAdditional InformationProject MUSE MissionProject MUSE promotes the creation and dissemination of essential humanities and social science resources through collaboration with libraries, publishers, and scholars worldwide. Forged from a partnership between a university press and a library, Project MUSE is a trusted part of the academic and scholarly community it serves.
2715 North Charles StreetBaltimore, Maryland, USA 21218+1 (410) 516-6989muse@jh.edu©2022 Project MUSE. Produced by Johns Hopkins University Press in collaboration with The Sheridan Libraries.
Now and Always,The Trusted Content Your Research RequiresNow and Always, The Trusted Content Your Research RequiresBuilt on the Johns Hopkins University CampusBuilt on the Johns Hopkins University Campus©2022 Project MUSE. Produced by Johns Hopkins University Press in collaboration with The Sheridan Libraries.
This website uses cookies to ensure you get the best experience on our website. Without cookies your experience may not be seamless.
