old id = 1828
The Year Everyone Remembered That Chips Matter | WIRED
1990
https://www.wired.com/story/year-everyone-remembered-chips-matter

To revist this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
To revist this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
Will KnightThe Year Everyone Remembered That Chips MatterTo revist this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
To revist this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
The most importanttechnology of the year was not Mark Zuckerberg’sMetaverse, Jack Dorsey’sblockchain, or Elon Musk’s, err,dancing robot.
It was more likely the same thing that has propelled progress in the tech industry for decades. The one that lets machines juggle and manipulate information, faster and more efficiently every year. It is, of course, thesilicon chip.
The importance of semiconductors may have faded from view over the last decade as the web, social media, and apps came to the fore.
Silicon Valleyis arguably now more synonymous withGoogle’s inescapable web search,Amazon’s ecommerce empire, orFacebook’s FOMO-fueled feed than withIntel’s newest chip. But the past year has provided plenty of evidence that chips are, in fact, more important than ever.
Rising demand for chips fromnew types of customerscombined with thepandemicandgeopolitical tensionsto put extraordinary pressure on the supply of both simple and advanced computer processors in 2021, resulting in shortages of everything from cars to game consoles. Control over the production of advanced silicon is shaping competition and conflict between the world’s two dominant superpowers. And many governments are set to pour huge sums into bolstering their manufacturing capabilities.
Custom chip designs are rapidly becoming increasingly vital to emerging fields such asartificial intelligence,self-driving cars, and5G. These specialized architectures, rather than general purpose chips, will help shape the course of innovation.
“There is really nothing humble about the silicon chip,” saysJésus del Alamo, a professor at MIT who teaches courses on advanced microelectronics. “They are at the heart of everything, and do so many critical things in so many valuable places, with incredible benefits to society.”Del Alamo notes that chips are now found in a bewildering array of products, making kitchen appliances, industrial machinery, and even objects as mundane as light bulbs connected and programmable.
Thepandemicquickly revealed how vital chips have become to the economy. When carmakers shut factories in early 2020, in anticipation of an economic slowdown, they canceled orders for low-cost chips increasingly needed in engines, safety systems, and infotainment displays. Even the most basic gas-powered car now has over 100 chips, while the latest electric vehicle may hold more than 1,000. When car buying recovered unexpectedly, manufacturers didn’t have enough silicon, and wereforced to halt production, dampening the economic recovery in many nations.
The computerization of everything from industrial robots to medical devices meant the chip shortage was felt far and wide. Meanwhile, the huge cost of building new chip plants, and the cyclical nature of the industry, hascaused the drought to drag on … and on. “Companies that considered chips as just another bullet item on a bill of materials now realize the relevance of semiconductors,” saysGaurav Gupta, a vice president at Gartner, a research firm, who tracks electronics. “Now everyone has to focus on, and strategize, the procurement of semiconductors.”ContentThis content can also be viewed on the site itoriginatesfrom.
The chip crunch has been exacerbated by tension between the US and China. The Trump administration barred the sale of the most advanced computer chips—those powering the latest smartphones or cloud servers—to Chinese companiesaccused of close ties to the governmentor ofaiding in human rights abusesof Muslims in Xinjiang province.
The blockade, which the Biden administration has kept in place, also reflects an awareness that these chips are crucial for progress in fields such as AI, 5G, and robotics, which are increasinglyseen as key to economic and militarycompetition. And because China lacks the capacity to manufacture the most advanced chips for itself, leading tech companies such as Huawei, which once led the world in smartphone sales, haveseen part of their business crippled. Some Chinese firms reportedlystockpiled chipsin anticipation of the ban, stretching available supplies still further.
The importance of advanced chip manufacturing has thrust some lesser-known companies into the geopolitical spat. The Dutch firm ASML is the world’s only maker of the$150-million extreme ultraviolet lithography machinesneeded to etch the most miniscule features into silicon chips. The US also has blocked ASML from exporting to China, effectively hobbling the country’s domestic chip industry.
But Washington’s chip gambit also reflects America’s weaknesses. In recent decades it has become incredibly complex and expensive to manufacture the fastest and most efficient chips, which feature atomic-scale features. Only three companies in the world are now capable of producing the most advanced components: TSMC in Taiwan, Samsung in South Korea, and Intel in the US. ButIntel has fallen behindTSMC and Samsung, and the US share of global chipmaking has slippedto an estimated 12 percent this year, from 37 percent in 1990, according to theSemiconductor Industry Association (SIA), an industry group.
In June the US Senate approved a bill with $52 billion aimed at reviving the US semiconductor industry; it is awaiting action by the House.
John Neuffer, CEO of the SIA, which is backed by US chip companies, says the money would help the US regain its edge and also ensure a robust supply of less advanced chips for the automotive industry. “Inaction is not an option” in the face of current trends, says Neuffer.
“They are at the heart of everything and do so many critical things in so many valuable places, with incredible benefits to society.”Jésus del Alamo, professor, MITOther nations are likely to invest similarly in an effort to prop up their chip industries. South Korea says it will invest more than $55 billion over the next three years to update and expand its manufacturing. European Union nations plan to invest $25 billion to $35 billion and will introduce tax and other incentives in an effort to snare 20 percent of global chipmaking by 2030. The Chinese government has signalled that it will spend $150 billion over the next 10 years in an effort to achieve chip manufacturing self-sufficiency.
Kevin Krewell, an analyst with Tirias Research who tracks the industry, notes that not all of the money will be invested in cutting edge chip making capacity, and shortages could still stretch into 2023 and 2024. “Demand shows no sign of slowing as cars get smarter with even more electronics and consumer devices keep growing in sophistication and number,” he says.
One reason it is so vital for the US to be able to make cutting-edge chips is that progress in chip manufacturing has begun slowing in recent years, making custom silicon a lot more important. For decades, the number of transistors on a chip, which roughly corresponds to its speed,doubled about every 18 months, an observation first made by Intel cofounder Gordon Moore; that’sno longer happening.
Custom chips offer a way to boost performance.
Apple, for instance, now designs its own chips for its smartphones, tablets, and laptops, as part ofa strategy that gives it greater controlover the performance of its products. It represents a striking turnaround for an industry where once only chip giants like Intel and AMD designed and made silicon. Now, a growing number of companies see specialized chip designs, including their own, as a way to gain an edge in areas like AI.
The chip at the heart of most computers, known as the central processing unit (CPU), is designed to be flexible enough to carry out any logical operation. But AI algorithms increasingly rely on more specialized chips, mostly the graphics processing units (GPUs) originally developed for video gaming, because they are well-suited to running the necessary mathematical calculations.
As AI becomes more important, and asalgorithms become larger and more expensiveto run, many companies are exploring customized designs. Amazon Web Services (AWS), the world’s largest provider of cloud computing services, has developed several chips specialized for AI, includingTrainium, for training AI models andInferentia, for running pre-trained models.
“GPUs in general are intended to solve a whole bunch of workloads,” says Raj Pai, a vice president at AWS involved with the company’s chip efforts. “With our own custom silicon we are able to really look at the sorts of models that our customers run and optimize the chip and the power and everything.”Other companies now designing their own chips to accelerate AI includeGoogle,Facebook,Microsoft, andTesla.
Neil Thompson, a professor at MIT who studies technological change, says the trend “is a very natural reaction to the slowing of Moore's law.” But he also believes itcould lead to less innovation in algorithms over time, as tech becomes more “siloed.”Now, AI is alsohelping design chips, making it easier for others to join the parade.
Bill Dally, chief scientist at Nvidia, which became the world’s most valuable chipmaker by selling its GPUs to AI engineers, says the company is using AI to design chips that are faster or more efficient than ones designed by hand. The technology will speed up chip design and lead to new designs, he says. “AI will have a profound impact on the process of chip design,” Dally says.
More From WIREDContact© 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of ourUser AgreementandPrivacy Policy and Cookie StatementandYour California Privacy Rights.
Wiredmay earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
Ad Choices
