old id = 2074
Privacy policy - SpaceWatch.Global
1720
https://spacewatch.global/privacy-policy

// window.__mirage2 = {petok:"f640f4b8b5aa8bca3797225b44e04b98aca29877-1653202745-14400"}; //SpaceWatch.Global An independent perspective on spaceBECOME an active spacewatch.global supporterJoin here NOWRivada Space Networks joins ITU Partner2Connect Digital CoalitionOfficina Stellare and Satellogic sign investment agreementMayday.ai and Satellogic collaborate to improve risk and disaster intelligenceClearSpace joins the Net Zero Space initiative#SpaceWatchGL Opinion: Space education per excellence – ISU SPACE STUDIES PROGRAM 2022#SpaceWatchGL Opinion: The Days of “Study, Wait, and Hope” Are Over—It’s Time to “Monitor, Characterize, and Act”#SpaceWatchGL Opinion: Australia needs to aim high with space strategic update#SpaceWatchGL Opinion: Satellites in a world of CrisisRivada Space Networks joins ITU Partner2Connect Digital CoalitionOfficina Stellare and Satellogic sign investment agreementMayday.ai and Satellogic collaborate to improve risk and disaster intelligenceClearSpace joins the Net Zero Space initiativeRivada Space Networks joins ITU Partner2Connect Digital CoalitionOfficina Stellare and Satellogic sign investment agreementMayday.ai and Satellogic collaborate to improve risk and disaster intelligenceClearSpace joins the Net Zero Space initiativeThe Space Cafe Podcast #054: Ane Aanesland, CEO of ThrustMe – A life between new propulsion technologies and Arctic adventures.
Space Café Austria by Judith Delany Recap: Trends in European Space Policy and the role of smaller nationsRegister Today For Our Space Café “33 minutes with Krystal Azelton” On 24 May 2022Space Café Canada by Dr. Jessica West Recap: Countdown to liftoff: The first Canadian spaceport under developmentPrivacy policy1. An overview of data protectionGeneral informationThe following information will provide you with an easy to navigate overview of what will happen with your personal data when you visit this website. The term “personal data” comprises all data that can be used to personally identify you. For detailed information about the subject matter of data protection, please consult our Data Protection Declaration, which we have included beneath this copy.
Data recording on this websiteWho is the responsible party for the recording of data on this website (i.e., the “controller”)?The data on this website is processed by the operator of the website, whose contact information is available under section “Information about the responsible party (referred to as the “controller” in the GDPR)” in this Privacy Policy.
How do we record your data?We collect your data as a result of your sharing of your data with us. This may, for instance be information you enter into our contact form.
Other data shall be recorded by our IT systems automatically or after you consent to its recording during your website visit. This data comprises primarily technical information (e.g., web browser, operating system, or time the site was accessed). This information is recorded automatically when you access this website.
What are the purposes we use your data for?A portion of the information is generated to guarantee the error free provision of the website. Other data may be used to analyze your user patterns.
What rights do you have as far as your information is concerned?You have the right to receive information about the source, recipients, and purposes of your archived personal data at any time without having to pay a fee for such disclosures. You also have the right to demand that your data are rectified or eradicated. If you have consented to data processing, you have the option to revoke this consent at any time, which shall affect all future data processing. Moreover, you have the right to demand that the processing of your data be restricted under certain circumstances. Furthermore, you have the right to log a complaint with the competent supervising agency.
Please do not hesitate to contact us at any time if you have questions about this or any other data protection related issues.
Analysis tools and tools provided by third partiesThere is a possibility that your browsing patterns will be statistically analyzed when your visit this website. Such analyses are performed primarily with what we refer to as analysis programs.
For detailed information about these analysis programs please consult our Data Protection Declaration below.
2. Hosting and Content Delivery Networks (CDN)External HostingThis website is hosted by an external service provider (host). Personal data collected on this website are stored on the servers of the host. These may include, but are not limited to, IP addresses, contact requests, metadata and communications, contract information, contact information, names, web page access, and other data generated through a web site.
The host is used for the purpose of fulfilling the contract with our potential and existing customers (Art. 6(1)(b) GDPR) and in the interest of secure, fast, and efficient provision of our online services by a professional provider (Art. 6(1)(f) GDPR). If appropriate consent has been obtained, the processing is carried out exclusively on the basis of Art. 6 (1)(a) GDPR and § 25 (1) TTDSG, insofar the consent includes the storage of cookies or the access to information in the user’s end device (e.g., device fingerprinting) within the meaning of the TTDSG. This consent can be revoked at any time.
Our host will only process your data to the extent necessary to fulfil its performance obligations and to follow our instructions with respect to such data.
We are using the following host:ProjectWorkersRuhlsdorfer Str. 9514532 StahnsdorfData processingWe have concluded a data processing agreement (DPA) with the above-mentioned provider. This is a contract mandated by data privacy laws that guarantees that they process personal data of our website visitors only based on our instructions and in compliance with the GDPR.
CloudflareWe use the “Cloudflare” service provided by Cloudflare Inc., 101 Townsend St., San Francisco, CA 94107, USA. (hereinafter referred to as “Cloudflare”).
Cloudflare offers a content delivery network with DNS that is available worldwide. As a result, the information transfer that occurs between your browser and our website is technically routed via Cloudflare’s network. This enables Cloudflare to analyze data transactions between your browser and our website and to work as a filter between our servers and potentially malicious data traffic from the Internet. In this context, Cloudflare may also use cookies or other technologies deployed to recognize Internet users, which shall, however, only be used for the herein described purpose.
The use of Cloudflare is based on our legitimate interest in a provision of our website offerings that is as error free and secure as possible (Art. 6(1)(f) GDPR).
Data transmission to the US is based on the Standard Contractual Clauses (SCC) of the European Commission. Details can be found here:https://www.cloudflare.com/privacypolicy/.
For more information on Cloudflare’s security precautions and data privacy policies, please follow this link:https://www.cloudflare.com/privacypolicy/.
Data processingWe have concluded a data processing agreement (DPA) with the above-mentioned provider. This is a contract mandated by data privacy laws that guarantees that they process personal data of our website visitors only based on our instructions and in compliance with the GDPR.
3. General information and mandatory informationData protectionThe operators of this website and its pages take the protection of your personal data very seriously. Hence, we handle your personal data as confidential information and in compliance with the statutory data protection regulations and this Data Protection Declaration.
Whenever you use this website, a variety of personal information will be collected. Personal data comprises data that can be used to personally identify you. This Data Protection Declaration explains which data we collect as well as the purposes we use this data for. It also explains how, and for which purpose the information is collected.
We herewith advise you that the transmission of data via the Internet (i.e., through e-mail communications) may be prone to security gaps. It is not possible to completely protect data against third-party access.
Information about the responsible party (referred to as the “controller” in the GDPR)The data processing controller on this website is:SpaceWatch.Global GmbHMessedamm 23AVUSTRIBUENE14055 BerlinPhone: +4930555797950E-mail:[email protected]The controller is the natural person or legal entity that single-handedly or jointly with others makes decisions as to the purposes of and resources for the processing of personal data (e.g., names, e-mail addresses, etc.).
Storage durationUnless a more specific storage period has been specified in this privacy policy, your personal data will remain with us until the purpose for which it was collected no longer applies. If you assert a justified request for deletion or revoke your consent to data processing, your data will be deleted, unless we have other legally permissible reasons for storing your personal data (e.g., tax or commercial law retention periods); in the latter case, the deletion will take place after these reasons cease to apply.
General information on the legal basis for the data processing on this websiteIf you have consented to data processing, we process your personal data on the basis of Art. 6(1)(a) GDPR or Art. 9 (2)(a) GDPR, if special categories of data are processed according to Art. 9 (1) DSGVO. In the case of explicit consent to the transfer of personal data to third countries, the data processing is also based on Art. 49 (1)(a) GDPR. If you have consented to the storage of cookies or to the access to information in your end device (e.g., via device fingerprinting), the data processing is additionally based on § 25 (1) TTDSG. The consent can be revoked at any time. If your data is required for the fulfillment of a contract or for the implementation of pre-contractual measures, we process your data on the basis of Art. 6(1)(b) GDPR. Furthermore, if your data is required for the fulfillment of a legal obligation, we process it on the basis of Art. 6(1)(c) GDPR. Furthermore, the data processing may be carried out on the basis of our legitimate interest according to Art. 6(1)(f) GDPR. Information on the relevant legal basis in each individual case is provided in the following paragraphs of this privacy policy.
Designation of a data protection officerWe have appointed a data protection officer for our company.
SpaceWatch.Global GmbHMessedamm 23AVUSTRIBUENE14055 BerlinPhone: +4930555797950E-mail:[email protected]Information on data transfer to the USA and other non-EU countriesAmong other things, we use tools of companies domiciled in the United States or other from a data protection perspective non-secure non-EU countries. If these tools are active, your personal data may potentially be transferred to these non-EU countries and may be processed there. We must point out that in these countries, a data protection level that is comparable to that in the EU cannot be guaranteed. For instance, U.S. enterprises are under a mandate to release personal data to the security agencies and you as the data subject do not have any litigation options to defend yourself in court. Hence, it cannot be ruled out that U.S. agencies (e.g., the Secret Service) may process, analyze, and permanently archive your personal data for surveillance purposes. We have no control over these processing activities.
Revocation of your consent to the processing of dataA wide range of data processing transactions are possible only subject to your express consent. You can also revoke at any time any consent you have already given us. This shall be without prejudice to the lawfulness of any data collection that occurred prior to your revocation.
Right to object to the collection of data in special cases; right to object to direct advertising (Art. 21 GDPR)IN THE EVENT THAT DATA ARE PROCESSED ON THE BASIS OF ART. 6(1)(E) OR (F) GDPR, YOU HAVE THE RIGHT TO AT ANY TIME OBJECT TO THE PROCESSING OF YOUR PERSONAL DATA BASED ON GROUNDS ARISING FROM YOUR UNIQUE SITUATION. THIS ALSO APPLIES TO ANY PROFILING BASED ON THESE PROVISIONS. TO DETERMINE THE LEGAL BASIS, ON WHICH ANY PROCESSING OF DATA IS BASED, PLEASE CONSULT THIS DATA PROTECTION DECLARATION. IF YOU LOG AN OBJECTION, WE WILL NO LONGER PROCESS YOUR AFFECTED PERSONAL DATA, UNLESS WE ARE IN A POSITION TO PRESENT COMPELLING PROTECTION WORTHY GROUNDS FOR THE PROCESSING OF YOUR DATA, THAT OUTWEIGH YOUR INTERESTS, RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS OR IF THE PURPOSE OF THE PROCESSING IS THE CLAIMING, EXERCISING OR DEFENCE OF LEGAL ENTITLEMENTS (OBJECTION PURSUANT TO ART. 21(1) GDPR).
IF YOUR PERSONAL DATA IS BEING PROCESSED IN ORDER TO ENGAGE IN DIRECT ADVERTISING, YOU HAVE THE RIGHT TO OBJECT TO THE PROCESSING OF YOUR AFFECTED PERSONAL DATA FOR THE PURPOSES OF SUCH ADVERTISING AT ANY TIME. THIS ALSO APPLIES TO PROFILING TO THE EXTENT THAT IT IS AFFILIATED WITH SUCH DIRECT ADVERTISING. IF YOU OBJECT, YOUR PERSONAL DATA WILL SUBSEQUENTLY NO LONGER BE USED FOR DIRECT ADVERTISING PURPOSES (OBJECTION PURSUANT TO ART. 21(2) GDPR).
Right to log a complaint with the competent supervisory agencyIn the event of violations of the GDPR, data subjects are entitled to log a complaint with a supervisory agency, in particular in the member state where they usually maintain their domicile, place of work or at the place where the alleged violation occurred. The right to log a complaint is in effect regardless of any other administrative or court proceedings available as legal recourses.
Right to data portabilityYou have the right to demand that we hand over any data we automatically process on the basis of your consent or in order to fulfil a contract be handed over to you or a third party in a commonly used, machine readable format. If you should demand the direct transfer of the data to another controller, this will be done only if it is technically feasible.
SSL and/or TLS encryptionFor security reasons and to protect the transmission of confidential content, such as purchase orders or inquiries you submit to us as the website operator, this website uses either an SSL or a TLS encryption program. You can recognize an encrypted connection by checking whether the address line of the browser switches from “http://” to “https://” and also by the appearance of the lock icon in the browser line.
If the SSL or TLS encryption is activated, data you transmit to us cannot be read by third parties.
Encrypted payment transactions on this websiteIf you are under an obligation to share your payment information (e.g. account number if you give us the authority to debit your bank account) with us after you have entered into a fee-based contract with us, this information is required to process payments.
Payment transactions using common modes of paying (Visa/MasterCard, debit to your bank account) are processed exclusively via encrypted SSL or TLS connections. You can recognize an encrypted connection by checking whether the address line of the browser switches from “http://” to “https://” and also by the appearance of the lock icon in the browser line.
If the communication with us is encrypted, third parties will not be able to read the payment information you share with us.
Information about, rectification and eradication of dataWithin the scope of the applicable statutory provisions, you have the right to at any time demand information about your archived personal data, their source and recipients as well as the purpose of the processing of your data. You may also have a right to have your data rectified or eradicated. If you have questions about this subject matter or any other questions about personal data, please do not hesitate to contact us at any time.
Right to demand processing restrictionsYou have the right to demand the imposition of restrictions as far as the processing of your personal data is concerned. To do so, you may contact us at any time. The right to demand restriction of processing applies in the following cases:If you have restricted the processing of your personal data, these data – with the exception of their archiving – may be processed only subject to your consent or to claim, exercise or defend legal entitlements or to protect the rights of other natural persons or legal entities or for important public interest reasons cited by the European Union or a member state of the EU.
Rejection of unsolicited e-mailsWe herewith object to the use of contact information published in conjunction with the mandatory information to be provided in our Site Notice to send us promotional and information material that we have not expressly requested. The operators of this website and its pages reserve the express right to take legal action in the event of the unsolicited sending of promotional information, for instance via SPAM messages.
4. Recording of data on this websiteCookiesOur websites and pages use what the industry refers to as “cookies.” Cookies are small text files that do not cause any damage to your device. They are either stored temporarily for the duration of a session (session cookies) or they are permanently archived on your device (permanent cookies). Session cookies are automatically deleted once you terminate your visit. Permanent cookies remain archived on your device until you actively delete them, or they are automatically eradicated by your web browser.
In some cases, it is possible that third-party cookies are stored on your device once you enter our site (third-party cookies). These cookies enable you or us to take advantage of certain services offered by the third party (e.g., cookies for the processing of payment services).
Cookies have a variety of functions. Many cookies are technically essential since certain website functions would not work in the absence of the cookies (e.g., the shopping cart function or the display of videos). The purpose of other cookies may be the analysis of user patterns or the display of promotional messages.
Cookies, which are required for the performance of electronic communication transactions, or for the provision of certain functions you want to use (e.g., for the shopping cart function) or those that are necessary for the optimization (required cookies) of the website (e.g., cookies that provide measurable insights into the web audience), shall be stored on the basis of Art. 6(1)(f) GDPR, unless a different legal basis is cited. The operator of the website has a legitimate interest in the storage of required cookies to ensure the technically error free and optimized provision of the operator’s services. If your consent to the storage of the cookies and similar recognition technologies has been requested, processing occurs exclusively on the basis of the consent obtained (Art. 6(1)(a) GDPR and § 25 (1) TTDSG); this consent may be revoked at any time.
You have the option to set up your browser in such a manner that you will be notified any time cookies are placed and to permit the acceptance of cookies only in specific cases. You may also exclude the acceptance of cookies in certain cases or in general or activate the delete function for the automatic eradication of cookies when the browser closes. If cookies are deactivated, the functions of this website may be limited.
In the event that third-party cookies are used or if cookies are used for analytical purposes, we will separately notify you in conjunction with this Data Protection Policy and, if applicable, ask for your consent.
Server log filesThe provider of this website and its pages automatically collects and stores information in so-called server log files, which your browser communicates to us automatically. The information comprises:This data is not merged with other data sources.
This data is recorded on the basis of Art. 6(1)(f) GDPR. The operator of the website has a legitimate interest in the technically error free depiction and the optimization of the operator’s website. In order to achieve this, server log files must be recorded.
Contact formIf you submit inquiries to us via our contact form, the information provided in the contact form as well as any contact information provided therein will be stored by us in order to handle your inquiry and in the event that we have further questions. We will not share this information without your consent.
The processing of these data is based on Art. 6(1)(b) GDPR, if your request is related to the execution of a contract or if it is necessary to carry out pre-contractual measures. In all other cases the processing is based on our legitimate interest in the effective processing of the requests addressed to us (Art. 6(1)(f) GDPR) or on your agreement (Art. 6(1)(a) GDPR) if this has been requested; the consent can be revoked at any time.
The information you have entered into the contact form shall remain with us until you ask us to eradicate the data, revoke your consent to the archiving of data or if the purpose for which the information is being archived no longer exists (e.g., after we have concluded our response to your inquiry). This shall be without prejudice to any mandatory legal provisions, in particular retention periods.
Request by e-mail, telephone, or faxIf you contact us by e-mail, telephone or fax, your request, including all resulting personal data (name, request) will be stored and processed by us for the purpose of processing your request. We do not pass these data on without your consent.
These data are processed on the basis of Art. 6(1)(b) GDPR if your inquiry is related to the fulfillment of a contract or is required for the performance of pre-contractual measures. In all other cases, the data are processed on the basis of our legitimate interest in the effective handling of inquiries submitted to us (Art. 6(1)(f) GDPR) or on the basis of your consent (Art. 6(1)(a) GDPR) if it has been obtained; the consent can be revoked at any time.
The data sent by you to us via contact requests remain with us until you request us to delete, revoke your consent to the storage or the purpose for the data storage lapses (e.g. after completion of your request). Mandatory statutory provisions – in particular statutory retention periods – remain unaffected.
EventbriteOn our website you have the possibility to book tickets for different events. The booking of tickets is done via the ticket booking system Eventbrite. The provider is Eventbrite, Inc., Delaware, 155 5th Street, Floor 7, San Francisco, CA 94103, USA.
When you book a ticket with us, Eventbrite collects all the data you provide during the booking process (name, e-mail address, etc.). In addition, your payment data, IP address and other metadata (browser, operating system, version, terminal device) are also collected.
You can view Eventbrite’s privacy policy here:https://www.eventbrite.de/support/articles/de/Troubleshooting/datenschutzrichtlinie-von-eventbrite?lg=de.
The data you enter will remain with us until you request us to delete it, revoke your consent to store it, or the purpose for storing the data no longer applies. Mandatory legal provisions – in particular retention periods – remain unaffected.
The legal basis for data processing is Art. 6(1)(f) DSGVO. The website operator has a legitimate interest in making the booking of tickets as uncomplicated as possible. If appropriate consent has been obtained, the processing is carried out exclusively on the basis of Art. 6(1)(a) GDPR and § 25 (1) TTDSG, insofar the consent includes the storage of cookies or the access to information in the user’s end device (e.g., device fingerprinting) within the meaning of the TTDSG. This consent can be revoked at any time.
Data transfer to the US is based on the standard contractual clauses of the EU Commission. Details can be found here:https://www.eventbrite.de/support/articles/de/Troubleshooting/datenschutzrichtlinie-von-eventbrite?lg=de.
Data processingWe have concluded a data processing agreement (DPA) with the above-mentioned provider. This is a contract mandated by data privacy laws that guarantees that they process personal data of our website visitors only based on our instructions and in compliance with the GDPR.
Registration on this websiteYou have the option to register on this website to be able to use additional website functions. We shall use the data you enter only for the purpose of using the respective offer or service you have registered for. The required information we request at the time of registration must be entered in full. Otherwise, we shall reject the registration.
To notify you of any important changes to the scope of our portfolio or in the event of technical modifications, we shall use the e-mail address provided during the registration process.
We shall process the data entered during the registration process on the basis of your consent (Art. 6(1)(a) GDPR).
The data recorded during the registration process shall be stored by us as long as you are registered on this website. Subsequently, such data shall be deleted. This shall be without prejudice to mandatory statutory retention obligations.
5. Social mediaFacebookWe have integrated elements of the social network Facebook on this website. The provider of this service is Meta Platforms Ireland Limited, 4 Grand Canal Square, Dublin 2, Ireland. According to Facebook’s statement the collected data will be transferred to the USA and other third-party countries too.
An overview of the Facebook social media elements is available under the following link:https://developers.facebook.com/docs/plugins/.
If the social media element has been activated, a direct connection between your device and the Facebook server will be established. As a result, Facebook will receive information confirming your visit to this website with your IP address. If you click on the Facebook Like button while you are logged into your Facebook account, you can link content of this website to your Facebook profile. Consequently, Facebook will be able to allocate your visit to this website to your user account. We have to emphasize that we as the provider of the website do not receive any information on the content of the transferred data and its use by Facebook. For more information, please consult the Data Privacy Policy of Facebook at:https://de-de.facebook.com/privacy/explanation.
If your approval (consent) has been obtained the use of the abovementioned service shall occur on the basis of Art. 6 Sect. 1 lit. a GDPR and § 25 TTDSG (German Telecommunications Act). Such consent may be revoked at any time. If your consent was not obtained, the use of the service will occur on the basis of our legitimate interest in making our information as comprehensively visible as possible on social media.
Insofar as personal data is collected on our website with the help of the tool described here and forwarded to Facebook, we and Meta Platforms Ireland Limited, 4 Grand Canal Square, Grand Canal Harbour, Dublin 2, Ireland are jointly responsible for this data processing (Art. 26 DSGVO). The joint responsibility is limited exclusively to the collection of the data and its forwarding to Facebook. The processing by Facebook that takes place after the onward transfer is not part of the joint responsibility. The obligations incumbent on us jointly have been set out in a joint processing agreement. The wording of the agreement can be found under:https://www.facebook.com/legal/controller_addendum. According to this agreement, we are responsible for providing the privacy information when using the Facebook tool and for the privacy-secure implementation of the tool on our website. Facebook is responsible for the data security of Facebook products. You can assert data subject rights (e.g., requests for information) regarding data processed by Facebook directly with Facebook. If you assert the data subject rights with us, we are obliged to forward them to Facebook.
Data transmission to the US is based on the Standard Contractual Clauses (SCC) of the European Commission. Details can be found here:https://www.facebook.com/legal/EU_data_transfer_addendum,https://de-de.facebook.com/help/566994660333381andhttps://www.facebook.com/policy.php.
TwitterWe have integrated functions of the social media platform Twitter into this website. These functions are provided by Twitter International Company, One Cumberland Place, Fenian Street, Dublin 2, D02 AX07, Ireland.
If the social media element has been activated, a direct connection between your device and Twitter’s server will be established. As a result, Twitter will receive information on your visit to this website. While you use Twitter and the “Re-Tweet” function, websites you visit are linked to your Twitter account and disclosed to other users. We must point out, that we, the providers of the website and its pages do not know anything about the content of the data transferred and the use of this information by Twitter. For more details, please consult Twitter’s Data Privacy Declaration at:https://twitter.com/en/privacy.
If your approval (consent) has been obtained the use of the abovementioned service shall occur on the basis of Art. 6(1)(a) GDPR and § 25 TTDSG (German Telecommunications Act). Such consent may be revoked at any time. If your consent was not obtained, the use of the service will occur on the basis of our legitimate interest in making our information as comprehensively visible as possible on social media.
Data transmission to the US is based on the Standard Contractual Clauses (SCC) of the European Commission. Details can be found here:https://gdpr.twitter.com/en/controller-to-controller-transfers.html.
You have the option to reset your data protection settings on Twitter under the account settings athttps://twitter.com/account/settings.
InstagramWe have integrated functions of the public media platform Instagram into this website. These functions are being offered by Meta Platforms Ireland Limited, 4 Grand Canal Square, Grand Canal Harbour, Dublin 2, Ireland.
If the social media element has been activated, a direct connection between your device and Instagram’s server will be established. As a result, Instagram will receive information on your visit to this website.
If you are logged into your Instagram account, you may click the Instagram button to link contents from this website to your Instagram profile. This enables Instagram to allocate your visit to this website to your user account. We have to point out that we as the provider of the website and its pages do not have any knowledge of the content of the data transferred and its use by Instagram.
If your approval (consent) has been obtained the use of the abovementioned service shall occur on the basis of Art. 6(1)(a) GDPR and § 25 TTDSG (German Telecommunications Act). Such consent may be revoked at any time. If your consent was not obtained, the use of the service will occur on the basis of our legitimate interest in making our information as comprehensively visible as possible on social media.
Insofar as personal data is collected on our website with the help of the tool described here and forwarded to Facebook or Instagram, we and Meta Platforms Ireland Limited, 4 Grand Canal Square, Grand Canal Harbour, Dublin 2, Ireland are jointly responsible for this data processing (Art. 26 DSGVO). The joint responsibility is limited exclusively to the collection of the data and its forwarding to Facebook or Instagram. The processing by Facebook or Instagram that takes place after the onward transfer is not part of the joint responsibility. The obligations incumbent on us jointly have been set out in a joint processing agreement. The wording of the agreement can be found under:https://www.facebook.com/legal/controller_addendum. According to this agreement, we are responsible for providing the privacy information when using the Facebook or Instagram tool and for the privacy-secure implementation of the tool on our website. Facebook is responsible for the data security of Facebook or Instagram products. You can assert data subject rights (e.g., requests for information) regarding data processed by Facebook or Instagram directly with Facebook. If you assert the data subject rights with us, we are obliged to forward them to Facebook.
Data transmission to the US is based on the Standard Contractual Clauses (SCC) of the European Commission. Details can be found here:https://www.facebook.com/legal/EU_data_transfer_addendum,https://help.instagram.com/519522125107875andhttps://de-de.facebook.com/help/566994660333381.
For more information on this subject, please consult Instagram’s Data Privacy Declaration at:https://instagram.com/about/legal/privacy/.
LinkedInThis website uses elements of the LinkedIn network. The provider is LinkedIn Ireland Unlimited Company, Wilton Plaza, Wilton Place, Dublin 2, Ireland.
Any time you access a page of this website that contains elements of LinkedIn, a connection to LinkedIn’s servers is established. LinkedIn is notified that you have visited this website with your IP address. If you click on LinkedIn’s “Recommend” button and are logged into your LinkedIn account at the time, LinkedIn will be in a position to allocate your visit to this website to your user account. We have to point out that we as the provider of the websites do not have any knowledge of the content of the transferred data and its use by LinkedIn.
If your approval (consent) has been obtained the use of the abovementioned service shall occur on the basis of Art. 6 (1)(a) GDPR and § 25 TTDSG (German Telecommunications Act). Such consent may be revoked at any time. If your consent was not obtained, the use of the service will occur on the basis of our legitimate interest in making our information as comprehensively visible as possible on social media.
Data transmission to the US is based on the Standard Contractual Clauses (SCC) of the European Commission. Details can be found here:https://www.linkedin.com/help/linkedin/answer/62538/datenubertragung-aus-der-eu-dem-ewr-und-der-schweiz?lang=en.
For further information on this subject, please consult LinkedIn’s Data Privacy Declaration at:https://www.linkedin.com/legal/privacy-policy.
6. Analysis tools and advertisingGoogle Tag ManagerWe use the Google Tag Manager. The provider is Google Ireland Limited, Gordon House, Barrow Street, Dublin 4, IrelandThe Google Tag Manager is a tool that allows us to integrate tracking or statistical tools and other technologies on our website. The Google Tag Manager itself does not create any user profiles, does not store cookies, and does not carry out any independent analyses. It only manages and runs the tools integrated via it. However, the Google Tag Manager does collect your IP address, which may also be transferred to Google’s parent company in the United States.
The Google Tag Manager is used on the basis of Art. 6(1)(f) GDPR. The website operator has a legitimate interest in the quick and uncomplicated integration and administration of various tools on his website. If appropriate consent has been obtained, the processing is carried out exclusively on the basis of Art. 6(1)(a) GDPR and § 25 (1) TTDSG, insofar the consent includes the storage of cookies or the access to information in the user’s end device (e.g., device fingerprinting) within the meaning of the TTDSG. This consent can be revoked at any time.
Google AnalyticsThis website uses functions of the web analysis service Google Analytics. The provider of this service is Google Ireland Limited (“Google”), Gordon House, Barrow Street, Dublin 4, Ireland.
Google Analytics enables the website operator to analyze the behavior patterns of website visitors. To that end, the website operator receives a variety of user data, such as pages accessed, time spent on the page, the utilized operating system and the user’s origin. This data is summarized in a user-ID and assigned to the respective end device of the website visitor.
Furthermore, Google Analytics allows us to record your mouse and scroll movements and clicks, among other things. Google Analytics uses various modeling approaches to augment the collected data sets and uses machine learning technologies in data analysis.
Google Analytics uses technologies that make the recognition of the user for the purpose of analyzing the user behavior patterns (e.g., cookies or device fingerprinting). The website use information recorded by Google is, as a rule transferred to a Google server in the United States, where it is stored.
The use of these services occurs on the basis of your consent pursuant to Art. 6(1)(a) GDPR and § 25(1) TTDSG. You may revoke your consent at any time.
Data transmission to the US is based on the Standard Contractual Clauses (SCC) of the European Commission. Details can be found here:https://privacy.google.com/businesses/controllerterms/mccs/.
IP anonymizationOn this website, we have activated the IP anonymization function. As a result, your IP address will be abbreviated by Google within the member states of the European Union or in other states that have ratified the Convention on the European Economic Area prior to its transmission to the United States. The full IP address will be transmitted to one of Google’s servers in the United States and abbreviated there only in exceptional cases. On behalf of the operator of this website, Google shall use this information to analyze your use of this website to generate reports on website activities and to render other services to the operator of this website that are related to the use of the website and the Internet. The IP address transmitted in conjunction with Google Analytics from your browser shall not be merged with other data in Google’s possession.
Browser plug-inYou can prevent the recording and processing of your data by Google by downloading and installing the browser plugin available under the following link:https://tools.google.com/dlpage/gaoptout?hl=en.
For more information about the handling of user data by Google Analytics, please consult Google’s Data Privacy Declaration at:https://support.google.com/analytics/answer/6004245?hl=en.
Google SignalsWe use Google Signals. Whenever you visit our website, Google Analytics records, among other things, your location, the progression of your search and YouTube progression as well as demographic data (site visitor data). This data may be used for customized advertising with the assistance of Google Signal. If you have a Google account, your site visitor information will be linked to your Google account by Google Signal and used to send you customized promotional messages. The data is also used to compile anonymized statistics of our users’ online patterns.
Demographic parameters provided by Google AnalyticsThis website uses the “demographic characteristics” function of Google Analytics, to be able to display to the website visitor compatible ads within the Google advertising network. This allows reports to be created that contain information about the age, gender, and interests of the website visitors. The sources of this information are interest-related advertising by Google as well as visitor data obtained from third-party providers. This data cannot be allocated to a specific individual. You have the option to deactivate this function at any time by making pertinent settings changes for advertising in your Google account or you can generally prohibit the recording of your data by Google Analytics as explained in section “Objection to the recording of data”.
Contract data processingWe have executed a contract data processing agreement with Google and are implementing the stringent provisions of the German data protection agencies to the fullest when using Google Analytics.
MatomoThis website uses the open-source web analysis service Matomo. Matomo uses technologies that make it possible to recognize the user across multiple pages with the aim of analyzing the user patterns (e.g. cookies or device fingerprinting). The information recorded by Matomo about the use of this website will be stored on our server. Prior to archiving, the IP address will first be anonymized.
Through Matomo, we are able to collect and analyze data on the use of our website-by-website visitors. This enables us to find out, for instance, when which page views occurred and from which region they came. In addition, we collect various log files (e.g. IP address, referrer, browser, and operating system used) and can measure whether our website visitors perform certain actions (e.g. clicks, purchases, etc.).
The use of this analysis tool is based on Art. 6(1)(f) GDPR. The website operator has a legitimate interest in the analysis of user patterns, in order to optimize the operator’s web offerings and advertising. If appropriate consent has been obtained, the processing is carried out exclusively on the basis of Art. 6(1)(a) GDPR and § 25 (1) TTDSG, insofar the consent includes the storage of cookies or the access to information in the user’s end device (e.g., device fingerprinting) within the meaning of the TTDSG. This consent can be revoked at any time.
IP anonymizationFor analysis with Matomo we use IP anonymization. Your IP address is shortened before the analysis, so that it is no longer clearly assignable to you.
HostingWe host Matomo exclusively on our own servers so that all analysis data remains with us and is not passed on.
WP StatisticsThis website uses the WP Statistics analysis tool to evaluate visitor accesses statistically. The provider is Veronalabs, ARENCO Tower, 27th Floor, Dubai Media City, Dubai, Dubai 23816, UAE (https://veronalabs.com).
WP Statistics can be used to analyze the use of our website. In doing so, WP Statistics records, among other things, log files (IP address, referrer, browser used, origin of the user, search engine used) and actions that the website visitors have taken on the site (e.g. clicks and views).
The data collected with WP Statistics is stored exclusively on our own server.
The use of this analysis tool is based on Art. 6(1)(f) GDPR. We have a legitimate interest in the anonymized analysis of user behavior in order to optimize both our websites and our advertising. If appropriate consent has been obtained, the processing is carried out exclusively on the basis of Art. 6(1)(a) GDPR and § 25 (1) TTDSG, insofar the consent includes the storage of cookies or the access to information in the user’s end device (e.g., device fingerprinting) within the meaning of the TTDSG. This consent can be revoked at any time.
IP anonymizationWe use WP Statistics with anonymized IP. Your IP address is shortened so that it can no longer be directly assigned to you.
Google Conversion-TrackingThis website uses Google Conversion Tracking. The provider of this service is Google Ireland Limited (“Google”), Gordon House, Barrow Street, Dublin 4, Ireland.
With the assistance of Google Conversion Tracking, we are in a position to recognize whether the user has completed certain actions. For instance, we can analyze the how frequently which buttons on our website have been clicked and which products are reviewed or purchased with particular frequency. The purpose of this information is to compile conversion statistics. We learn how many users have clicked on our ads and which actions they have completed. We do not receive any information that would allow us to personally identify the users. Google as such uses cookies or comparable recognition technologies for identification purposes.
The use of these services occurs on the basis of your consent pursuant to Art. 6(1)(a) GDPR and § 25(1) TTDSG. You may revoke your consent at any time.
For more information about Google Conversion Tracking, please review Google’s data protection policy at:https://policies.google.com/privacy?hl=enFacebook PixelTo measure conversion rates, this website uses the visitor activity pixel of Facebook. The provider of this service is Meta Platforms Ireland Limited, 4 Grand Canal Square, Dublin 2, Ireland. According to Facebook’s statement the collected data will be transferred to the USA and other third-party countries too.
This tool allows the tracking of page visitors after they have been linked to the website of the provider after clicking on a Facebook ad. This makes it possible to analyze the effectiveness of Facebook ads for statistical and market research purposes and to optimize future advertising campaigns.
For us as the operators of this website, the collected data is anonymous. We are not in a position to arrive at any conclusions as to the identity of users. However, Facebook archives the information and processes it, so that it is possible to make a connection to the respective user profile and Facebook is in a position to use the data for its own promotional purposes in compliance with theFacebook Data Usage Policy. This enables Facebook to display ads on Facebook pages as well as in locations outside of Facebook. We as the operator of this website have no control over the use of such data.
The use of these services occurs on the basis of your consent pursuant to Art. 6(1)(a) GDPR and § 25(1) TTDSG. You may revoke your consent at any time.
Data transmission to the US is based on the Standard Contractual Clauses (SCC) of the European Commission. Details can be found here:https://www.facebook.com/legal/EU_data_transfer_addendumundhttps://de-de.facebook.com/help/566994660333381.
Insofar as personal data is collected on our website with the help of the tool described here and forwarded to Facebook, we and Meta Platforms Ireland Limited, 4 Grand Canal Square, Grand Canal Harbour, Dublin 2, Ireland are jointly responsible for this data processing (Art. 26 DSGVO). The joint responsibility is limited exclusively to the collection of the data and its forwarding to Facebook. The processing by Facebook that takes place after the onward transfer is not part of the joint responsibility. The obligations incumbent on us jointly have been set out in a joint processing agreement. The wording of the agreement can be found under:https://www.facebook.com/legal/controller_addendum. According to this agreement, we are responsible for providing the privacy information when using the Facebook tool and for the privacy-secure implementation of the tool on our website. Facebook is responsible for the data security of Facebook products. You can assert data subject rights (e.g., requests for information) regarding data processed by Facebook directly with Facebook. If you assert the data subject rights with us, we are obliged to forward them to Facebook.
In Facebook’s Data Privacy Policies, you will find additional information about the protection of your privacy at:https://www.facebook.com/about/privacy/.
You also have the option to deactivate the remarketing function “Custom Audiences” in the ad settings section underhttps://www.facebook.com/ads/preferences/?entry_product=ad_settings_screen. To do this, you first have to log into Facebook.
If you do not have a Facebook account, you can deactivate any user-based advertising by Facebook on the website of the European Interactive Digital Advertising Alliance:http://www.youronlinechoices.com/de/praferenzmanagement/.
Facebook Custom AudiencesWe use Facebook Custom Audiences. The provider of this service is Meta Platforms Ireland Limited, 4 Grand Canal Square, Dublin 2, Ireland.
Whenever you visit or use our website and apps, utilize our portfolio (e.g., participation in sweepstakes), transfer data to us or interact with the Facebook content of our company, we record related personal data. In the event that you have given us your consent to the use of Facebook Custom Audiences, we will share these data with Facebook to put Facebook in a position to send you compatible ads. These data may also be used to defined target audiences (Lookalike Audiences).
Facebook processes these data as our contract processor. For details, please consult the user agreement of Facebook:https://www.facebook.com/legal/terms/customaudience.
The use of these services occurs on the basis of your consent pursuant to Art. 6(1)(a) GDPR and § 25(1) TTDSG. You may revoke your consent at any time.
The transfer of date to the USA is based on the standard contract clauses of the EU Commission. For details please see:https://www.facebook.com/legal/terms/customaudienceandhttps://www.facebook.com/legal/terms/dataprocessing.
LinkedIn Insight TagThis website uses the Insight tag from LinkedIn. This service is provided by LinkedIn Ireland Unlimited Company, Wilton Plaza, Wilton Place, Dublin 2, Ireland.
Data processing by LinkedIn Insight tagWe use the LinkedIn Insight tag to obtain information about visitors to our website. Once a website visitor is registered with LinkedIn, we can analyze the key occupational data (e.g., career level, company size, country, location, industry, job title) of our website visitors to help us better target our site to the relevant audience. We can also use LinkedIn Insight tags to measure whether visitors to our websites make a purchase or perform other actions (conversion measurement). Conversion measurement can also be carried out across devices (e.g. from PC to tablet). LinkedIn Insight Tag also features a retargeting function that allows us to display targeted advertising to visitors to our website outside of the website. According to LinkedIn, no identification of the advertising addressee takes place.
LinkedIn itself also collects log files (URL, referrer URL, IP address, device and browser characteristics and time of access). The IP addresses are shortened or (if they are used to reach LinkedIn members across devices) hashed (pseudonymized). The direct identifiers of LinkedIn members are deleted by LinkedIn after seven days. The remaining pseudonymized data will then be deleted within 180 days.
The data collected by LinkedIn cannot be assigned by us as a website operator to specific individuals. LinkedIn will store the personal data collected from website visitors on its servers in the USA and use it for its own promotional activities. For details, please see LinkedIn’s privacy policy athttps://www.linkedin.com/legal/privacy-policy#choices-oblig.
Legal basisIf your approval (consent) has been obtained the use of the abovementioned service shall occur on the basis of Art. 6(1)(a) GDPR and § 25 TTDSG (German Telecommunications Act). Such consent may be revoked at any time. If your consent was not obtained, the use of the service will occur on the basis of Art. 6(1)(f) GDPR; the website operator has a legitimate interest in effective advertising promotions that include the utilization of social media.
Data transmission to the US is based on the Standard Contractual Clauses (SCC) of the European Commission. Details can be found here:https://www.linkedin.com/legal/l/dpaundhttps://www.linkedin.com/legal/l/eu-sccs.
Objection to the use of LinkedIn Insight TagYou can object to LinkedIn’s analysis of user behavior and targeted advertising at the following link:https://www.linkedin.com/psettings/guest-controls/retargeting-opt-out.
In addition, LinkedIn members can control the use of their personal information for promotional purposes in the account settings. To prevent LinkedIn from linking information collected on our site to your LinkedIn account, you must log out of your LinkedIn account before you visit our site.
Data processingWe have concluded a data processing agreement (DPA) with the above-mentioned provider. This is a contract mandated by data privacy laws that guarantees that they process personal data of our website visitors only based on our instructions and in compliance with the GDPR.
7. NewsletterNewsletter dataIf you would like to receive the newsletter offered on the website, we require an e-mail address from you as well as information that allows us to verify that you are the owner of the e-mail address provided and that you agree to receive the newsletter. Further data is not collected or only on a voluntary basis. For the handling of the newsletter, we use newsletter service providers, which are described below.
MailchimpThis website uses the services of Mailchimp to send out its newsletters. The provider is the Rocket Science Group LLC, 675 Ponce De Leon Ave NE, Suite 5000, Atlanta, GA 30308, USA.
Among other things, Mailchimp is a service that can be deployed to organize and analyze the sending of newsletters. Whenever you enter data for the purpose of subscribing to a newsletter (e.g. your e-mail address), the information is stored on Mailchimp servers in the United States.
With the assistance of the Mailchimp tool, we can analyze the performance of our newsletter campaigns. If you open an e-mail that has been sent through the Mailchimp tool, a file that has been integrated into the e-mail (a so-called web-beacon) connects to Mailchimp’s servers in the United States. As a result, it can be determined whether a newsletter message has been opened and which links the recipient possibly clicked on. Technical information is also recorded at that time (e.g. the time of access, the IP address, type of browser and operating system). This information cannot be allocated to the respective newsletter recipient. Their sole purpose is the performance of statistical analyses of newsletter campaigns. The results of such analyses can be used to tailor future newsletters to the interests of their recipients more effectively.
If you do not want to permit an analysis by Mailchimp, you must unsubscribe from the newsletter. We provide a link for you to do this in every newsletter message.
The data is processed based on your consent (Art. 6(1)(a) GDPR). You may revoke any consent you have given at any time by unsubscribing from the newsletter. This shall be without prejudice to the lawfulness of any data processing transactions that have taken place prior to your revocation.
The data deposited with us for the purpose of subscribing to the newsletter will be stored by us until you unsubscribe from the newsletter or the newsletter service provider and deleted from the newsletter distribution list after you unsubscribe from the newsletter. Data stored for other purposes with us remain unaffected.
Data transmission to the US is based on the Standard Contractual Clauses (SCC) of the European Commission. Details can be found here:https://mailchimp.com/eu-us-data-transfer-statement/andhttps://mailchimp.com/legal/data-processing-addendum/#Annex_C_-_Standard_Contractual_Clauses.
After you unsubscribe from the newsletter distribution list, your e-mail address may be stored by us or the newsletter service provider in a blacklist, if such action is necessary to prevent future mailings. The data from the blacklist is used only for this purpose and not merged with other data. This serves both your interest and our interest in complying with the legal requirements when sending newsletters (legitimate interest within the meaning of Art. 6(1)(f) GDPR). The storage in the blacklist is indefinite.
You may object to the storage if your interests outweigh our legitimate interest.
For more details, please consult the Data Privacy Policies of Mailchimp at:https://mailchimp.com/legal/terms/.
Data processingWe have concluded a data processing agreement (DPA) with the above-mentioned provider. This is a contract mandated by data privacy laws that guarantees that they process personal data of our website visitors only based on our instructions and in compliance with the GDPR.
8. Plug-ins and ToolsYouTubeThis website embeds videos of the website YouTube. The website operator is Google Ireland Limited (“Google”), Gordon House, Barrow Street, Dublin 4, Ireland.
If you visit a page on this website into which a YouTube has been embedded, a connection with YouTube’s servers will be established. As a result, the YouTube server will be notified, which of our pages you have visited.
Furthermore, YouTube will be able to place various cookies on your device or comparable technologies for recognition (e.g. device fingerprinting). In this way YouTube will be able to obtain information about this website’s visitors. Among other things, this information will be used to generate video statistics with the aim of improving the user friendliness of the site and to prevent attempts to commit fraud.
If you are logged into your YouTube account while you visit our site, you enable YouTube to directly allocate your browsing patterns to your personal profile. You have the option to prevent this by logging out of your YouTube account.
The use of YouTube is based on our interest in presenting our online content in an appealing manner. Pursuant to Art. 6(1)(f) GDPR, this is a legitimate interest. If appropriate consent has been obtained, the processing is carried out exclusively on the basis of Art. 6(1)(a) GDPR and § 25 (1) TTDSG, insofar the consent includes the storage of cookies or the access to information in the user’s end device (e.g., device fingerprinting) within the meaning of the TTDSG. This consent can be revoked at any time.
For more information on how YouTube handles user data, please consult the YouTube Data Privacy Policy under:https://policies.google.com/privacy?hl=en.
VimeoThis website uses plug-ins of the video portal Vimeo. The provider is Vimeo Inc., 555 West 18th Street, New York, New York 10011, USA.
If you visit one of the pages on our website into which a Vimeo video has been integrated, a connection to Vimeo’s servers will be established. As a consequence, the Vimeo server will receive information as to which of our pages you have visited. Moreover, Vimeo will receive your IP address. This will also happen if you are not logged into Vimeo or do not have an account with Vimeo. The information recorded by Vimeo will be transmitted to Vimeo’s server in the United States.
If you are logged into your Vimeo account, you enable Vimeo to directly allocate your browsing patterns to your personal profile. You can prevent this by logging out of your Vimeo account.
Vimeo uses cookies or comparable recognition technologies (e.g. device fingerprinting) to recognize website visitors.
The use of Vimeo is based on our interest in presenting our online content in an appealing manner. Pursuant to Art. 6(1)(f) GDPR, this is a legitimate interest. If appropriate consent has been obtained, the processing is carried out exclusively on the basis of Art. 6(1)(a) GDPR and § 25 (1) TTDSG, insofar the consent includes the storage of cookies or the access to information in the user’s end device (e.g., device fingerprinting) within the meaning of the TTDSG. This consent can be revoked at any time.
Data transmission to the US is based on the Standard Contractual Clauses (SCC) of the European Commission and, according to Vimeo, on “legitimate business interests”. Details can be found here:https://vimeo.com/privacy.
For more information on how Vimeo handles user data, please consult the Vimeo Data Privacy Policy under:https://vimeo.com/privacy.
Google Web FontsTo ensure that fonts used on this website are uniform, this website uses so-called Web Fonts provided by Google. When you access a page on our website, your browser will load the required web fonts into your browser cache to correctly display text and fonts.
To do this, the browser you use will have to establish a connection with Google’s servers. As a result, Google will learn that your IP address was used to access this website. The use of Google Web Fonts is based on Art. 6(1)(f) GDPR. The website operator has a legitimate interest in a uniform presentation of the font on the operator’s website. If appropriate consent has been obtained, the processing is carried out exclusively on the basis of Art. 6(1)(a) GDPR and § 25 (1) TTDSG, insofar the consent includes the storage of cookies or the access to information in the user’s end device (e.g., device fingerprinting) within the meaning of the TTDSG. This consent can be revoked at any time.
If your browser should not support Web Fonts, a standard font installed on your computer will be used.
For more information on Google Web Fonts, please follow this link:https://developers.google.com/fonts/faqand consult Google’s Data Privacy Declaration under:https://policies.google.com/privacy?hl=en.
Font Awesome (local embedding)This website uses Font Awesome to ensure the uniform use of fonts on this site. Font Awesome is locally installed so that a connection to Fonticons, Inc.’s servers will not be established in conjunction with this application.
For more information on Font Awesome, please and consult the Data Privacy Declaration for Font Awesome under:https://fontawesome.com/privacy.
WordfenceWe have included Wordfence on this website. The provider is Defiant Inc, Defiant, Inc, 800 5th Ave Ste 4100, Seattle, WA 98104, USA (hereinafter “Wordfence”).
Wordfence is designed to protect our website from unwanted access or malicious cyberattacks. To accomplish this, our website establishes a permanent connection with Wordfence’s servers, which check and block their databases against access to our website.
The use of Wordfence is based on Art. 6(1)(f) GDPR. The website operator has a legitimate interest in the most effective protection of his website against cyberattacks. If appropriate consent has been obtained, the processing is carried out exclusively on the basis of Art. 6(1)(a) GDPR and § 25 (1) TTDSG, insofar the consent includes the storage of cookies or the access to information in the user’s end device (e.g., device fingerprinting) within the meaning of the TTDSG. This consent can be revoked at any time.
Data transmission to the USA is based on the standard contractual clauses of the EU Commission. Details can be found here:https://www.wordfence.com/help/general-data-protection-regulation/.
Data processingWe have concluded a data processing agreement (DPA) with the above-mentioned provider. This is a contract mandated by data privacy laws that guarantees that they process personal data of our website visitors only based on our instructions and in compliance with the GDPR.
iThemes SecurityWe have integrated iThemes Security into this website. The provider is iThemes Media LLC, 1720 South Kelly Avenue Edmond, OK 73013, USA (hereinafter referred to as “iThemes Security”).
iThemes Security protects our website against undesirable access or malicious cyber-attacks. For this purpose, iThemes Security records, among other things, your IP address, the time, and source of login attempts and log files (e.g., the utilized browser). iThemes Security is installed locally on our servers.
iThemes Security transmits IP addresses of recurring attackers to a central database of iThemes in the US (Network Brute Force Protection) to prevent such attacks in the future.
The use of iThemes Security is based on Art. 6(1)(f) GDPR. The website operator has a legitimate interest in protecting its website optimally against cyber-attacks. If appropriate consent has been obtained, the processing is carried out exclusively on the basis of Art. 6(1)(a) GDPR and § 25 (1) TTDSG, insofar the consent includes the storage of cookies or the access to information in the user’s end device (e.g., device fingerprinting) within the meaning of the TTDSG. This consent can be revoked at any time.
9. Online-based Audio and Video Conferences (Conference tools)Data processingWe use online conference tools, among other things, for communication with our customers. The tools we use are listed in detail below. If you communicate with us by video or audio conference using the Internet, your personal data will be collected and processed by the provider of the respective conference tool and by us. The conferencing tools collect all information that you provide/access to use the tools (email address and/or your phone number). Furthermore, the conference tools process the duration of the conference, start and end (time) of participation in the conference, number of participants and other “context information” related to the communication process (metadata).
Furthermore, the provider of the tool processes all the technical data required for the processing of the online communication. This includes, in particular, IP addresses, MAC addresses, device IDs, device type, operating system type and version, client version, camera type, microphone or loudspeaker and the type of connection.
Should content be exchanged, uploaded, or otherwise made available within the tool, it is also stored on the servers of the tool provider. Such content includes, but is not limited to, cloud recordings, chat/ instant messages, voicemail uploaded photos and videos, files, whiteboards, and other information shared while using the service.
Please note that we do not have complete influence on the data processing procedures of the tools used. Our possibilities are largely determined by the corporate policy of the respective provider. Further information on data processing by the conference tools can be found in the data protection declarations of the tools used, and which we have listed below this text.
Purpose and legal basesThe conference tools are used to communicate with prospective or existing contractual partners or to offer certain services to our customers (Art. 6(1)(b) GDPR). Furthermore, the use of the tools serves to generally simplify and accelerate communication with us or our company (legitimate interest in the meaning of Art. 6(1)(f) GDPR). Insofar as consent has been requested, the tools in question will be used on the basis of this consent; the consent may be revoked at any time with effect from that date.
Duration of storageData collected directly by us via the video and conference tools will be deleted from our systems immediately after you request us to delete it, revoke your consent to storage, or the reason for storing the data no longer applies. Stored cookies remain on your end device until you delete them. Mandatory legal retention periods remain unaffected.
We have no influence on the duration of storage of your data that is stored by the operators of the conference tools for their own purposes. For details, please directly contact the operators of the conference tools.
Conference tools usedWe employ the following conference tools:ZoomWe use Zoom. The provider of this service is Zoom Communications Inc, San Jose, 55 Almaden Boulevard, 6th Floor, San Jose, CA 95113, USA. For details on data processing, please refer to Zoom’s privacy policy:https://zoom.us/en-us/privacy.html.
Data transmission to the US is based on the Standard Contractual Clauses (SCC) of the European Commission. Details can be found here:https://zoom.us/de-de/privacy.html.
Data processingWe have concluded a data processing agreement (DPA) with the above-mentioned provider. This is a contract mandated by data privacy laws that guarantees that they process personal data of our website visitors only based on our instructions and in compliance with the GDPR.
Deactivate Google AnalyticsDeactivate Google AnalyticsDeactivate MatomoDeactivate MatomoSubscription Login hereJobs in spaceBecome a SpaceWatcherNewsletter SubscriptionMost read posts – last 7 daysMost Read Posts – All TimeRussian actress to defy Tom Cruise in Hollywood race to spaceSpaceX to fly Starship 50,000 feet high, with 1/3 chance to get it back intactInterview: Eran Privman of Israel’s SpaceIL – Ready to Play With the Big BoysSatellite communications for those in greatest need – a message from the Publisher of SpaceWatch Middle EastAustralia And UAE Space Agencies Sign Partnership MoU In AdelaideCorporateBecome a SpaceWatcher@Follow UsFind us on FacebookPrivacy settingsYou can enable or disable different types of cookies:This website willThis website won'tThis website willThis website won'tThis website willThis website won'tThis website willThis website won't
