old id = 39
Welcome to Janelle Monáe’s Dreamworld | WIRED
2018
https://www.wired.com/story/janelle-monae-afrofuturism-book-memory-librarian

To revist this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
To revist this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
Mary RettaWelcome to Janelle Monáe’s DreamworldTo revist this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
To revist this article, visit My Profile, thenView saved stories.
There’s an oldstory about Octavia Butler that I often return to: A young man once asked the visionary science fiction novelist the answer to ending all the suffering in the world. “There isn't one,” Butler replied. “So we’re doomed?” he asked, confused. “No,” said Butler. Then she delivered the words that would remake my understanding of the future: “There’s no single answer that will solve all of our future problems. There’s no magic bullet. Instead there are thousands of answers—at least. You can be one of them if you choose to be.”Black futurist artists are often regarded as prophets, and expected, unfairly, to foretell the path that will lead us to a brighter tomorrow. Butler, who started writing during the Black Power movement and died, at 58 years old, in 2006, was looked to as an oracle of her time. Today, one of Butler’s most vital successors is the multifaceted artist Janelle Monáe. But if Monáe knows the future, she’s not quite telling. Speaking with her feels less like questioning an oracle than it does scheming with a wiser, older friend.
ContentThis content can also be viewed on the site itoriginatesfrom.
I am talking to Monáe about her new book,The Memory Librarian, a collection ofscience fictionstories she cowrote with five writers. During our conversation, which takes place over Zoom, Monáe’s voice is soft yet unhesitant, casually commanding attention. Ever a performer, her face is dramatically half-concealed under a fuzzy, black-and-white-checkered bucket hat. In her responses to my questions she speaks carefully, as if slowed by the gravity behind her vision and work.
Like Butler before her, Monáe works in a genre called Afrofuturism. Loosely defined, it imagines the future of Black liberation from a hostile world—ours. Although she’s publishing a book and stars in movies, Monáe is best known as a musician, and it was her 2018 concept album,Dirty Computer, that defined her Afrofuturist visions. “What Afrofuturism does is it allows Black people to tell our stories, from our voice, of how we see ourselves in the future, thriving,” Monáe tells me. WithThe Memory Librarian, Monáe seamlessly translates the detailed dystopian world ofDirty Computerfrom sound to page. We see many of the same characters: an android named Jane, her love interest Zen, a smattering of government workers and civilians. We see rebellion forming against a violent surveillance state, and queer desire in the midst of an apocalypse.
Buy this book at:If you buy something using links in our stories, we may earn a commission. This helps support our journalism.
Learn more.
In her book, Monáe offers us a warning, but also a way out. Look around, she says. More and more, we are being stripped of our flesh-and-blood identities and extracted into data. But this transformation doesn’t have to destroy us; even the computerized body, Monáe insists, can preserve its humanity. Flawed, dirty, proudly glitching, the queer robots of Monáe’s vision refuse to be so easily boiled down into 1s and 0s.
The Memory Librarianmight not betheanswer to the social and political upsets of our time, but it isananswer, and a fiercely inspiring one: a deepening of Afrofuturism’s potential to weaponize our dreams for a freer, more joyous world.
Afrofuturism’s central propositionis that Black people can control their own futures and that, moreover, they can escape the suffocating limits of time itself. Past becomes future becomes present; memory becomes prophecy becomes reality. Freedom is not just a dream for the future but a history we know we’ll relive once more. InThe Memory Librarian, Monáe’s titular character collects and keeps people’s memories, wielding a terrifying power. She understands that the withholding of memory can be deployed as a weapon, while its resurgence can act as a means of survival.
This motif of memory plays on a historical truth: White people have controlled the individual and collective memories of Black Americans for centuries. When slaves were first brought to the American continent, their names were changed, their languages suppressed, their marriages undocumented, their graves unmarked. Families were separated; Black folks had the image of their mother’s face, their sister’s smile, taken from them. Many Black Americans today struggle to trace their family members back more than a few generations. Their lineage, their names, and their identities are remembered only to the extent that whiteness allows.
In resistance to this, Black speculative fiction often blows up linear or chronological time: a way to move forward while keeping hold of the past. Perhaps the best example is Butler’s 1979 novelKindred, in which Dana, a young Black woman and writer, travels between 1970s California and an antebellum Maryland plantation, where she meets her enslaved ancestors. In one version of this story, a modern-day woman is thrust violently into the era of slavery; in an alternative reading, the protagonist is an enslaved woman, traveling to a better future. When Black peopletravel through time, then journey to space, and then arrive in the present once more, their movements contend: You cannot rule my days with your arbitrary hours. The pace of my clock is mine to decide.
Beyond literature, Black musicians have been imbuing Afrofuturist themes into their artistry for decades. During the 1950s and ’60s, experimental jazz musician Sun Ra pioneered a kind of Afrofuturist music. (The termAfro-futurism, coined in 1994 by the white culture critic Mark Dery, is retroactively applied here.) With songs like “Spaceship Lullaby” and “Love in Outer Space,” Ra blended smooth jazz and inventive, hopeful lyrics to create a musical dream of intergalactic harmony. Ra’s music led the way for a second Afrofuturist musical wave in the 1970s, when artists such as jazz legend Alice Coltrane and the psychedelic-funk group Parliament sang of universal consciousness and outer space connection. As Monáe broke out in the music scene in 2010, she became contemporaries with the likes of Erykah Badu and Missy Elliot, whose music at the time also played with themes of space and Black futuristic aesthetics.
Despite its current cultural ubiquity, Afrofuturism has no singular definition. The genre has become associated with a diverse set of Black creatives, including writer and activist adrienne maree brown, comedian and filmmaker Jordan Peele, and novelist Jesmyn Ward, all of whom make art with a political bent. In her 2013 bookAfrofuturism: The World of Black Sci-Fi and Fantasy Culture, Ytasha L. Womack locates Afrofuturism at “an intersection of imagination, technology, the future and liberation.” Womack’s insistence that the obsessions of Afrofuturism are not only technology but also imagination and freedom speaks to the genre’s political purpose: Black liberation.
More recently, Kathy Brown, an art professor, noted in an interview withD Magazinethat Afrofuturism requires both “forward thinking as well as backward thinking, while having a distressing past, a distressing present, but still looking forward to thriving in the future.” Brown’s inclusion of “backward thinking” in the making of a Black future provides an element of comfort: To imagine a time that Black people lived free of the horrors of colonialism, we can look to the Continent, look to our ancestors, and know that the way of life we are fighting for is possible. Afrofuturist art asks of us, How can we resolve the problems of tomorrow by employing the solutions of yesterday? And for Monáe, both the problem and the solution come back to one entity: the computer.
Dirty Computercame to Monáe in a dream: One evening, a woman sits by herself in a crowded movie theater. She is reclined in her seat, quietly absorbed by the story on display. Her face shines, illuminated by the warm glow of the screen, while the corners of the theater recede into the dark. The night is still—until it bursts. Suddenly a group of mysterious beings emerge from the shadows, grab the woman, and drag her from her seat. She gasps; the ushers try in vain to save her. Who are they, what do they want? Nothing less than to erase the woman’s memories of who she is and where she came from: her loves, her wants. They are successful—she is never seen or heard from again.
That is, until Janelle Monáe woke up.
Some nightmares dissipate with daylight, but not this one. Monáe’s nightmare disturbed her. She rose out of bed and fetched her voice recorder to speak the memory of her dream into the machine. If she allowed herself to forget this, she felt, she might forget everything—maybe even her name. “I knew that I had to speak so that the real me wouldn’t be erased,” Monáe tells me.
At the time, she was several years off the release of her 2013 albumThe Electric Lady, which weaves between soul, funk, rock, and pop sounds to riff on queer desire (“Am I a freak because I love watching Mary?”), futurist visions (“My seed will grow / I’ll be further to my dreams tomorrow”), and inter-galactic utopia (“My spaceship leaves at 10:00 / Oh I’m where I wanna be, just you and me”). Already in that album Monáe was fascinated with androids—singing of a woman who is “electric,” who can “shock me one good time.” Meanwhile, she launched an acting career, starring in the Academy Award–winning filmMoonlightas well asHidden Figures, in which she plays the real-life 1950s NASA engineer Mary Jackson. The beginnings of the Trump presidency, too, sharpened Monáe’s public commitments to feminism and to sexual and racial freedoms. On some of her songs, the artist’s rage is explicit: “If you try to grab my pussy cat, this pussy grab you back.” In others, she is less direct but no less pointed: “I am not America’s nightmare / I am the American cool.” Monáe’s nightmare crystallized these thoughts; then they came to the fore inDirty Computer.
Monáe offers us a warning, but also a way out.
The album tells the story of Jane 57821, a woman who is apprehended by a mysterious authoritarian regime. The woman has been flagged and categorized as a “dirty computer,” a term for citizens who are Black, queer, or other-wise outside the norm. The government’s aim is to erase the memories of all dirty computers by physically incapacitating them and forcing them to ingest a gaseous poison that eliminates all traces of autonomy, resistance, and desire in the subject, thus bringing society into “a New Dawn,” where everyone unthinkingly obeys the ruling power.
In a film made to accompany the album, Jane, played by Monáe, attempts to preserve her personal memories by enacting them in musical numbers. In “Crazy, Classic Life,” Monáe smuggles her friends to a rager in the trunk of her car, narrowly avoiding the careful watch of cop-like drones; in “Pynk,”an ode to her sapphic desires, she dances in vulva-shaped pants through a salmon-colored desert. Then: Two bored government workers touch a button and the brilliant, multicolored scenes are erased from her mind. The album is both cautionary tale and Afrofuturist prophecy: a testament to Black queer survival in unbearable conditions.
The Memory Librarianbuilds on the universe ofDirty Computerfirst in its collaboration. By cowriting the book with five women and nonbinary authors—Yohanca Delgado, Eve L. Ewing, Alaya Dawn Johnson, Danny Lore, and Sheree Renée Thomas—Monáe, who is pansexual and nonbinary, has literally created a network of dirty computers, programmed to contaminate the system from the inside out. Seshet, a librarian appointed under the New Dawn’s government, struggles to reconcile the responsibilities of her position with her desire for Alethia, a transgender woman with anti--establishment politics. There is a power imbalance in their relationship: Seshet, as an official, has been allowed to recover her memories of a pre-Dawn life, while Alethia, marked as a dirty computer, lives without a history of her own. More troubling, Seshet can intervene directly in Alethia’s memories; when their love affair becomes too dangerous, she simply erases Alethia’s memory of them having ever met. Other stories have brighter thrills. In “Never Mind,” Jane and Zen, also dirty computers, take refuge in the Pynk Hotel, a place where queer and trans people can create new memories to replace the ones stolen by the New Dawn.
It’s not difficult to see the connections betweenThe Memory Librarian’s dystopian universe and contemporary America. During our conversation, Monáe passionately condemned the recent conservative efforts to ban children’s books containing LGBTQ characters or references to slavery in school libraries. “They are trying their best to stop us from remembering the horrors of America,” Monáe says.
ReadingThe Memory Librarian, I felt an acute sense of dread, not just in anticipation of the fictional apocalyptic future that Monáe describes, but for how closely this future mirrors the world we live in. The book calls on you to ask yourself, Who was I before the coronavirus pandemic, before Trump became president, before the glaciers began to melt into the sea? When I lost a day scrolling on Instagram or clicked “yes” when a shopping site asked to take cookies from my computer, did I allow an unknown entity to steal a piece of who I am? And even knowing this, will I do the same again tomorrow? The New Dawn may not arrive as dramatically as Monáe writes, but it is coming, or maybe it’s already here.
Science fiction is particularly rich terrain for Black authors to explore the evils of the world, because Blackness and technology have historically been in tension. For centuries, Black bodies were exploited and used as machines, sites of experiment, and other vehicles for white discovery. I’m reminded of HeLa cells, an immortal cell line widely used in medical research—including for the Covid-19 vaccine—and named for Henrietta Lacks, the Black woman from whose body the cells were taken without compensation or consent.
In an unclean world, being dirty is the purest state of all.
Today’s tech climate is no less saturated with anti-Blackness. ScholarSimone Brownedraws a direct line from the practice of slave branding to biometric identification, and from the figure of the overseer to modern surveillance tech, which disproportionately targets Black people. Racism operates on a more literal level as well: In 2011,Safiya Nobleentered “Black girls” into Google, looking up activities for her young stepdaughter and nieces, and turned up pages of pornography. She documented the ways everyday search tools present racist perceptions as factual reality in her bookAlgorithms of Oppression; a decade later, our most commonly used algorithms—including many that govern policing, health care, and social services—are still encoded with racial bias.
Monáe’s response to technology’s hostile effects is to refuse to lose sight of the humanity of her subjects, whether or not they are actually human. Much of her work suggests provocatively that man and machine are perhaps not so dissimilar, allowing for a simultaneous humanizing of computers and a strangely tender optimization of people. In her song “Take a Byte,” a computerized body experiences desire and is desired in return: “Your code is programmed not to love me, but you can’t pretend.” It’s an artful vision that subverts the categories of “person” and “computer” and moves them out of opposition, into harmony. Her characters are computers yet dirty, metal yet flesh, sterile yet mysteriously impure. They are coded, miraculously, to love.
Monáe is not the only artist to flip the script on Blackness and technology. In Ryan Coogler’s quintessentially Afro-futurist 2018 filmBlack Panther, residents of the fictional African country Wakanda mine a metal called vibranium to develop technology so advanced, so far beyond the rest of the world, that the nation is able to covertly pose as a developing country to protect itself from the colonizing interests of Western nations. It’s a clever move that brings to mind writer and curator Legacy Russell’s concept of “glitch feminism.” If the political and economic machine in which we live is broken, the idea goes, then being a glitch in this machine is a sign of decency rather than deformity. “This glitch is a correction to the ‘machine,’” Russell writes, “and, in turn, a positive departure.” Russell’sglitchis Monáe’sdirty computer—in an unclean world, being dirty is the purest state of all.
One way tothink about Afrofuturism is what it isnot: a presentation of the past as clean and whole, with previous tragedies living at a neat and soothing distance from the present. In other words, the inverse of Afrofuturist thinking is nostalgia. Andnostalgiais precisely what drives much of contemporary cultural production today. Fashion from the early aughts is making a comeback; TV series from the ’90s and 2000s are getting modern reboots. The algorithms that determine what we watch, what we listen to, what news we read, and what we buy recycle the habits of our consumption history and reiterate the same familiar content in an endless loop. There is something remarkably white about this type of engagement with the past: Things are bad now, so let’s remember the “before times” fondly—as if the racism, homophobia, and xenophobia in the narratives of today haven’t been there all along. In comparison, Afrofuturism’s promise to liberate us from the cycles of past time feels startlingly new, even risky. It requires a trust fall.
If the goal of Afrofuturist art is to create a new future, then the genre is not only inherently Black but also intrinsically queer. Some Afrofuturism writers, like adrienne maree brown, are openly queer, and cornerstone novels such as Butler’sFledglingand N. K. Jemisin’sThe Inheritancefeature queer characters and relationships. More than that, the genre draws on the author bell hooks’ definition of queerness as not only “about who you’re having sex with” but rather “about the self that is at odds with everything around it and has to invent and create and find a place to speak and to thrive and to live.”The sort of nonstandard, nonlinear time popular in Afrofuturism is often said to be queer time, in part because to bend time’s one-way direction makes it possible to live a warmer, safer future in the here and now—something that queer people, as well as folks of other marginalized identities, are constantly seeking. Straight time is oppressive—and oppressively boring—while the chronologies of Afrofuturism are elastic, kinky, multiplicitous. “Queerness is not yet here,” as José Esteban Muñoz writes in his bookCruising Utopia: The Then and There of Queer Futurity. “The future is queerness’ domain.”In Monáe’s universe, queer love sets one free. The heroes of herDirty Computerfilm are a Black, queer, poly-amorous couple who ultimately escape their captivity. For me, though, the clearest image of her vision comes from one of her earlier music videos, “Tightrope.” It takes place in a prison-like world where dancing has been forbidden for its “subversive effects” and its “tendency to lead to illegal magical practices.” Naturally, Monáe and her comrades proceed to sing and dance themselves to freedom, moonwalking gracefully across the prison floors.
Janelle Monáe is a dreamer, in every sense of the word. She falls asleep and tumbles into a fascistic, dystopian nightmare; she wakes up, still living inside it, and invents a way out. For some this cycle would horrify; for Monáe, it animates. “You can’t turn off the soul of a computer, you just can’t,” she says. Whether she’s referring to her own mind or to a different machine is unclear, and perhaps irrelevant. “Even when we sleep, we’re dreaming. When I’m resting and I’m in my dreams, what am I doing? I’m waking up with something; it never ends.”Portrait by Frazer Harrison/Getty ImagesThis article appearsin the June 2022 issue.
Subscribe now.
Let us know what you think about this article. Submit a letter to the editor atmail@wired.com.
More From WIREDContact© 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of ourUser AgreementandPrivacy Policy and Cookie StatementandYour California Privacy Rights.
Wiredmay earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
Ad Choices
