old id = 368
9 Ways You Can Use Your Devices for Advanced Scientific Research
2018
https://singularityhub.com/2017/12/31/9-ways-you-can-use-your-devices-for-advanced-scientific-research

9 Ways You Can Use Your Devices for Advanced Scientific ResearchWant to help solve world problems like finding a cure for cancer? Looking to make a global impact in 2018 with minimal effort on your part? It’s relatively easy to use your devices for scientific research by donating processing power from your various smart devices. Being acitizen scientistis easy!Withalmost four billion internet usersand an average ofthree devices per userglobally, there is a huge amount of untapped processing power that could be used for scientific research to help solve world problems. If even only a few of those billions offer up their processors, the results are powerful.
Take, for example, Berkeley’s Open Infrastructure for Network Computing (BOINC), one of the most notable distributed computing systems for scientific research. According to BOINC, there are currently178,417 people volunteeringtheir unused computing power for various scientific projects (as of this writing). Further, BOINC currently estimates its 24-hour computing power average to be23.190 PetaFLOPS. To put this in perspective, that would rank third in the latestTop500list of fastest supercomputers.
Imagine if we all donated our devices’ downtime to science. How much more quickly could we help find a cure for cancer or Alzheimer’s? Maybe it’s time we stop looking at social media for hours a day and put our devices to work to benefit humanity at large.
Here’s an alphabetical list of some of the top ways scientific researchers can utilize your unused processing power via distributed computing.
1. Track asteroids:Asteroids@HomeWe still havedifficulty knowing/detectingwhen giant asteroids may be on a direct trajectory with Earth.
Asteroids@Homeaims to study the various spins and shapes of the numerous asteroids within our solar system. The biggest obvious benefit here is to improve our knowledge of the giant rocks pinballing through space but also to study the origins of the solar system and more.
2. Improve Climatology:Climateprediction.netWant to help out with climate science? Climateprediction.net is a University of Oxford project focused on climate modelingprojectsfrom geoengineering to hydrological cycles to ocean changes.
3. Advanced Astrophysics:Einstein@HomeWhen providing your computer’s idle time to Einstein@Home, you are helping to directly research gravitational waves and discover neutron stars. Fouracademic papershave already been submitted this year with help from data crunched by citizen scientists’ computer processing power.
4. Fight Disease:Folding@HomeFolding@Home uses processing power to better understand the chemistry of proteins, develop new drugs, and untangle the relationship between protein folding and disease. Started in 2000 by Stanford researchers, they are nowresearchinginfectious diseases, cancer, and neurological diseases. These include:5. Profit First:Golem(GNT)This is a very unique case and is more or less in its own category. Golem explains itself as a “global, open sourced, decentralized supercomputer that anyone can access.” Its cryptocurrency-based system allows users to make money by providing their processing power. It also uses the same system to conduct research, compute programs, run websites, etc. With a current market capitalization of$193 millionand growing, Golem will be an interesting platform to take into account.
6. Science First:Gridcoin(GRC)Gridcoin is an alternative to Golem that similarly offers a cryptocurrency-based reward mechanism directly built on top of the BOINC system for your volunteer computing power. This integration makes selecting the programs you want from BOINC a bit more straightforward to setup. You can now run several of the other programs listed in this article and make a minute amount of money. While the market cap is much smaller than Golem (hovering around$16 million), it is definitely worth considering. Here’s a good post describing somebenefits of Gridcoinover similar platforms (iEX, SONM).
Here are a few other interesting alternatives to Gridcoin and Golem to check out:7. Predict Earthquakes:MyShakeEarthquakes are one of the most difficult natural hazards to accurately predict. Using advanced neural networks to analyze crowdsourced accelerometer and GPS data, MyShake is an app from Berkeley researchers that is building a crowdsourced global seismic network to more accurately predict future seismic events. If you live in a known seismic area, this is one you probably want to install. Even though scientists have continually been working on new ways and hope to eventuallyforecastfuture earthquakes, there is still much to be learned. If you want to take it a step further, you canjointhe Quake Catcher Network (QCN) and set up a physical sensor at your house for detection.
8. Discover Drugs:Rosetta@HomeFrom coming up with new potential drug discovery possibilities to predicting and designing protein structures, your computations will go to great use. Rosetta@Home has helped build20,000 new protein drug candidatesand learnnew rulesof protein folding for development of future medicine.
9. Improve Health:World Community GridThe World Community Grid is IBM’s philanthropic initiative to use distributed network computing to help advance scientific research with issues around health, poverty, and sustainability. You can use your devices to help researchers learn more about multiple diseases and how to combat them. Here are a few of theircurrent research projectsyour computing power can get to work on:Still looking for more? You can check theBOINC project listto easily choose from different scientific disciplines. And here’s the most comprehensive list I’ve found for alldistributed computing projects.
Given there are many options to choose from to use your devices for scientific research, how do you choose to use your processing power for which specific scientific research program?Find the impactthat creates meaning for you and put your effort into helpingsolve that issue.
If you’re still stuck, I highly suggest watching this video ofPeter Diamandis talking about passionto get you started on your purpose-driven life.
Image Credit:Mirexon/Shutterstock.comFollow Kirk:LatestThis Week’s Awesome Tech Stories From Around the Web (Through May 21)Volvo and DHL Are Partnering on Hub-to-Hub Autonomous TruckingHow a Volcanic Bombardment in Ancient Australia Led to the World’s Greatest Climate CatastropheRELATEDDemocracy Is Ailing. Here’s How We Can Start Reviving ItA One-and-Done CRISPR Gene Therapy Will Aim to Prevent Heart AttacksLargest Genetic Study to Date Unveils DNA Profiles That Lead to CancerRepublish this article for free in any language, online or in print, under theCreative Commonslicense CC BY-ND 4.0. Learn more aboutrepublishing.
RepublishYou are free to republish this article in any language, online or in print, under theCreative Commonslicense CC BY-ND 4.0. By republishing this content you agree to comply with the Singularity HubRepublishing Guidelines.
When republishing, please do not edit the contents of the article, ensure that you attribute the author and acknowledge that the article was originally published on Singularity Hub. Pleasecontact uswith any questions.
To republish this article, copy the HTML code below and paste it to your CMS. Please do not remove the pixel counter.
Press Ctrl+C to copy and Ctrl+V to paste.
How the Extinction of Ice Age Mammals May Have Forced Us to Invent CivilizationGet the latest news from Singularity Hub!Singularity University, Singularity Hub, Singularity Summit, SU Labs, Singularity Labs, Exponential Medicine, Exponential Finance and all associated logos and design elements are trademarks and/or service marks of Singularity Education Group.
© 2022 Singularity Education Group. All Rights Reserved.
Singularity University is not a degree granting institution.
