old id = 1688
AI Science and Technology Apprenticeship Residency (“AISTAR”) Program – NYU Center for Data Science
2018
https://cds.nyu.edu/aistar

NYU Center for Data ScienceHarnessing Data’s Potential for the WorldAI Science and Technology Apprenticeship Residency (“AISTAR”) ProgramOver the past five years, there has been an explosion of interest in the adoption of artificial intelligence (AI) technologies across all aspects of society. The rapid rate of developments in the field has far outstripped the ability of the broader community to keep up. Scientific advances in AI are increasingly made by a small group of high-technology companies and universities, and information flow is inherently limited. As a result, AI technologies are often applied blindly to problems with mixed results and significant levels of frustration to practitioners.
NYU proposes to alleviate some of these issues by opening its doors to practitioners in the field through a new program, calledAI Science and Technology Apprenticeship Residencies (“AISTAR”).
NYU is at the forefront of the AI Revolution, having some of the top faculty in the world in AI, including such luminaries asYann LeCun(one of the 3 awardees of the2018 Turing Award, the “Nobel Prize” of Computer Science),Rob Fergus,Brenden Lake,Sam BowmanandKyunghyun Cho, amongst others. The goal ofAISTARis to host practitioners and scientists in AI for extended visits at NYU to provide them opportunities to take thelatest advancesandbest practicesin AI back to their home institutions.
While at NYU, the visiting scientists will be attached to ongoing research activities and mentored by top faculty in the field. Each scientist will work on a four-to-six month research project, have a senior faculty mentor, and will also have open access to senior staff for resolving day-to-day research and computational issues. They will also be able to attend NYU seminars, reading groups and classes. Scientific outcomes from their projects will be openly disseminated in the forms of academic publication and open source software, hence allowing visiting scientists to bring them back unencumbered to the visitor’s host institution. Participants will be asked to help defray program costs; there will be multiple options to match organizational needs.
The program will be hosted jointly by theCenter for Data Scienceand theCourant Institute of Mathematical Sciences (Computer Science) at 60 5th Avenue in New York City. Theprogram head is Professor Kyunghyun Cho, one of the original developers of attention-based modeling in machine translation and NLP. Because of the COVID-19 crisis, we are starting an online pilot program in 2021. If you would like more information and/or participate in the program, please contact us atai-scientists-in-residence@nyu.edufor more details.
©2022 NYU CDS 7th floor, 60 5th Ave, New York, NY, 10011NYU Center for Data Science
