old id = 2473
Blue Origin: Key Facts, Future Plans for Jeff Bezos' Space Firm
2018
https://www.businessinsider.com/jeff-bezos-blue-origin-stepping-down-amazon-ceo-space-2021-2

Jeff Bezos is now devoting his time to building multi-billion dollar rockets. Here's how his space company, Blue Origin, hopes to colonize the solar system.
Just a month after leaving Amazon, Bezosflew into spaceonboard Blue Origin's New Shepard rocket.
It's a sign that,having left Amazon,Bezos is dedicating more time to Blue Origin, the space company he founded in 2000. The company's aim is to transform space travel.
Ina letter to Amazon employeesin February, Bezos said that as Amazon's executive chairman he would "stay engaged in important Amazon initiatives but also have the time and energy I need to focus" on projects such as Blue Origin, the Washington Post, his Day 1 Fund, and the Bezos Earth Fund.
Bezos will therefore be more involved in Blue Origin going forward. The company wants to continue to build more rockets and engines to launch people, and other payloads, beyond Earth's orbit, and to ultimately colonize the solar system.
"We're committed to building a road to space so our children can build the future," the company says on itswebsite.
What is Blue Origin?Blue Origin is an American aerospace manufacturer and spaceflight company headquartered in Kent, Washington. It's owned by Bezos and is currently headed by CEO Bob Smith.
Bezos founded Blue Origin in 2000, and says it's his 'most important work'Bezos, the world's second-richest person, founded Blue Origin in September 2000, with the goal of making space travel cheap, frequent, and more accessible, through reusable launch systems.
Bezos said in a 2018 interview with Axel Springer that the spaceflight company was his"most important work,"— more important than Amazon.
"I'm pursuing this work because I believe if we don't, we will eventually end up with a civilization of stasis, which I find very demoralizing," he said.
The billionaire's passion for his space-travel company stems from his childhood.
Insider's Dave Mosherreported in 2018 that Bezos spent his childhood summers on his grandparents' large ranch in South Texas learning about machinery. He also went to the local library to read science fiction novels about space exploration.
Blue Origin's motto is "Gradatim Ferociter," Latin for "step by step, ferociously."Bezos often uses the hashtag in his Instagram posts about the firm.
What Blue Origin will do nextIn July's flight, Bezos flew to the edge of space withthree crewmates: his brother Mark; 82-year-old aviator Wally Funk; and 18-year-old Oliver Daeman from the Netherlands. The 11-minute flight was Blue Origin's first crewed mission, and it traveled 62 miles above the Earth's surface.
Blue Origin has a host of projects in the pipeline for Bezos to get stuck into.
NASA greenlighted Blue Originin December for future Earth observation missions, planetary expeditions, and satellite launches with its New Glenn rocket, taking the space company one step closer to the stars.
In May, Blue Origin was awarded$1 billion from NASAto produce initial designs for a human-landing system for the Artemis 3 mission, which aims to land humans on the moon in 2024.
Blue Origin is competing against Elon Musk's SpaceX and Alabama-based Dynetics to land NASA astronauts on the moon in 2024. Bezos said in anInstagrampost in December the company couldpossibly take the first womanthere, too.
Read more:Meet the Washington Post executive working with Jeff Bezos to turbocharge the media titan's IT systemThe aerospace firm was also among17 US companies to be picked by NASAin November to develop new tech for space missions to "the moon and beyond." The selected companies will get access to NASA's testing facilities and expertise, which it valued at about $15.5 million.
The rockets in Blue Origin's pipelineBezos is pouringbillionsinto the design, building, and launching of Blue Origin's orbital and suborbital space vehicles.
The company's New Shepard suborbital rocket, named after Alan Shepard, who was the first American to go into space, ultimately aims to offer a 100-kilometer (62-mile) journey above Earth's surface that lasts 11 minutes.
The mostrecent successful flight of New Shepardwas on January 14, when it carried acrash-test dummynamed "Mannequin Skywalker" into space.
The New Glenn rocket, named after pioneering astronaut John Glenn, is a 310-foot reusable heavy-lift launch vehicle that can carry payloads to orbit.
Blue Origin said that New Glenn is designed for a minimum of 25 flights, and can lift 45 tons into low-Earth orbit — as a comparison, SpaceX's Falcon Heavy can lift 70 tons into low-Earth orbit. It's expected to be launched in 2021.
In 2019, Bezos unveiled a giant lunar lander called"Blue Moon"that he said is "going to the moon" and would help Blue Origin populate space. The final goal is to establish what the company calls a "sustained human presence" on the moon.
Blue Origin has also developed five rocket engines since its founding - BE-1, BE-2, BE-3, BE-4, and BE-7. In line with the company's reusability objective, the engines are designed for multiple uses and are tested at its test site in Van Horn, Texas.
Keep readingSEE ALSO:Jeff Bezos will step down as Amazon's CEO later this year and be replaced by AWS CEO Andy JassySEE ALSO:NASA green lights Jeff Bezos' space company Blue Origin for future missions, including planetary expeditions and satellite launchesSEE ALSO:What billionaire Jeff Bezos says he will do after stepping down as Amazon CEOSEE ALSO:Read the letter Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos wrote to his 1.3 million employees announcing he's stepping downSEE ALSO:Jeff Bezos plans to step down as Amazon CEO later this year. Here's how he makes and spends his $196 billion fortune.
SEE ALSO:Jeff Bezos is stepping down as Amazon CEO. Here's how he built Amazon into a $1.56 trillion company and became the world's richest person.
NOW WATCH: Watch Jeff Bezos' Blue Origin rocket go to space and land back on Earth
