old id = 3793
36 Best Meal Delivery Services to Try in 2022 | SELF
2018
https://www.self.com/story/the-12-best-meal-kit-delivery-services-for-easy-pre-prepped-dinners-and-smoothies

The 36 Best Meal Delivery Services to Try in 2022ByMeg Lappe, C.P.T.
,Lori Keong, andKristi KelloggMeal delivery services have seen a major uptick in sales, especially during peak pandemic as people sought ways to avoid grocery shopping and to destress at least one aspect of their lives: food prep. If you can afford to spend a little more on regular deliveries, meal kits are an easy way to ensure you have everything you need to makehealthy mealsall week long and cut down on the shopping and chopping.
The field is growing, with specialty purveyors focusing onvegan foods, seasonal ingredients, and smoothies. Some services—like Sunbasket, Snap Kitchen, and Fresh and Easy—send you oven-ready meals that are ready to warm and serve, which can come in handy if you’re cooking-challenged or used to getting takeout. For parents who are juggling childcare with working from home these days, there aremeal services for kidslike Yumble and Little Spoon that specifically cater to children.
With so manymeal kit optionsout there, we’ve curated a selection of the best meal kit delivery services (includingbudget-friendly meal kits) to help you choose, all of which send everything you need to make amazing, restaurant-quality meals at home—and take grocery shopping and sometimes even vegetable chopping off your to-do list. Think exciting and interesting meals, clear-cut and easy-to-follow instructions, and all the ingredients you need in the perfect amounts, so there’s no guesswork andvery little waste(not to mention no leaving the house or planning ahead).
We’ve had a chance to try most of them firsthand, and we gotta say, they make us feel like accomplished home cooks.
All products featured on SELF are independently selected by our editors. If you buy something through our retail links, we may earn an affiliate commission.
1.
Home ChefWhy It’s Worth It:Home Chef allows you to choose from nearly a dozen meals each week, and in about 30 minutes or less you can whip up tasty dishes that are catered to your cravings and dietary restrictions. Meat or veg? Avoiding dairy? Cutting out nuts? Soy? Wheat? Home Chef has you covered with fresh ingredients for meals such as shrimp scampi pasta, farmhouse fried chicken, and tomato risotto. Menus are set five weeks ahead, so you can know what’s for dinner more than a month ahead of time.
If you’rereallynew to this whole cooking-for-yourself thing, the service even has a kitchenware page on its site where you can buy a selection ofbasic kitchen toolsthat will get you on the road to slicing and dicing like a pro. Stock up, get helpful meal-prep tips from chefs, and get ready to impress yourself. Beyond entrée-size portions, Home Chef also offers five-minute oven-ready lunches and dinners you simply have to heat up.
Our commerce editor, whotried Home Cheffirst hand, praised how easy and satisfying the service was to use: "I don't have to do the shopping, ingredients are precisely measured so that I can toss them in without fuss, and when I'm done, a magazine-worthy meal is left on my plate, in its sweet, savory glory."Cost:Meals start at $7 per serving (choose from two or four servings) and can even be customized for an additional fee; different meal options are availableon the site. Delivery is free for orders over $49, and $10 for anything less than that amount.
Availability:NationwideCustomer Review:“Home Chef is where it’s at. My wife is a nurse, and during these crazy times we were looking for an easy option to help with dinners. A friend sent us a promotion for Home Chef where they were offering discounts to frontline workers. We have not looked back! The meals are consistently delicious and easy to make. I have been helping my wife cook dinners, and I must say they are very easy to make and fantastic. Every meal we have had has been a hit. We tried another service (I won’t mention the name), and the experience was horrible. The food was difficult to cook and some of the vegetables were extremely dirty. Home Chef delivers a fantastic meal every single time! I highly recommend it!” —Sascha2.
SunbasketWhy It’s Worth It:The folks at Sunbasket prioritize high-quality ingredients above all else, and it shows. The produce is all organic, the meat is antibiotic-free with no added hormones, and the seafood is fresh-caught in the wild. On top of that, if you're looking for apaleo meal delivery service, Sunbasket offers a variety of meal-plan options for a paleo diet. It caters to other special such as vegan, vegetarian, and pescatarian. (You can opt to mix and match recipes from all of these different menus too!). Fans of the program love how fresh everything tastes and note that the recipes are simple enough for weeknights (but never boring or run-of-the-mill).
Offerings range from classics like chicken milanese with charred lemon and braised chickpeas and carrots with quinoa and yogurt to experimental new combinations like farro risotto with zucchini, tomatoes, and soft-cooked eggs. And for the people who are really short on time, Sunbasket also offers pre-prepped meals (they come sliced and diced so all you have to do is toss them in a pan), or precooked options that you can reheat and serve.
Weekly deliveries arrive in packaging that’s 100% recyclable and compostable, which is another bonus. Choose between the classic plan—which serves two to four people and offers paleo, gluten-free, vegan, vegetarian, pescatarian, diabetes-friendly, and more specialty meal-plan options—or the family plan, which serves four and offers kid-friendly meals as well as a vegetarian option.
Cost:$72 per week for three meals for two people; $88 per week for two meals for four people. Other plans are available on the site.
Availability:Nationwide, excluding Alaska, Hawaii, Montana, and parts of New MexicoCustomer Review:“The food, the customer service, and recipes are incredible. It’s made eating healthy easy. I know I will have three great meals every week. The quality of the food is great. The recipes are things I never would pick on my own but are so good. I’m also learning to be a better cook. The customer service has been great as well. I’ve needed to call a few times to modify orders, and they’ve been so responsive and pleasant.” —Valorie3.
Green ChefWhy It’s Worth It:If you’re concerned about your carbon footprint as a result of your meal kit habit, rest a little easier knowing that this is one of the mosteco-friendlyplans out there. Green Chef offers USDA-certified-organic meal kits, making sure that at least 90% of the ingredients it sends you are organic. All food is sourced sustainably from traceable farmers and manufacturers, which is also helpful for people who are conscientious of where their ingredients come from. The company provides useful guides on its website to show you how to reuse and recycle its packaging whenever possible, and the paper bags and cardboard boxes that its kits are shipped in (plus everything else, from the paper bags to the ice packs) are also either recyclable or sourced from recycled materials.
On the food front, the meal kit also offers a range of options to choose from, including carnivore, omnivore, vegetarian, and vegan meal plans, pluspaleo, keto, and gluten-free menus. The recipes are easy to follow on color-coded recipe cards and aim to take 30 minutes from start to finish. But don’t expect simple, boring meals just because they’re quick to prep. Green Chef’s meals can definitely push you out of your comfort zone (in the best way) with new flavors and pairings, and often include instructions on how to make speciality sauces and glazes to drizzle over your finished meal. Sample meals include apricot-glazed pork meatballs, butternut and porcini linguine, curry-roasted chickpea bowls, and sesame-crusted chicken.
Cost:From $79 per week for three meals for two people (including shipping, though some dietary options are more); $95 per week for two meals for four people (including shipping).
Availability:NationwideCustomer Review:“I have tried a few meal kits before Green Chef and then stopped them after a short while. Green Chef provides the best meal kits. They couldn't be better! All you need to make their meals is a little time to prepare and cook it. They provide the rest. It's well worth the extra time it takes to prep and cook the meals. The vegetables and meat are of excellent quality. The food is clean. Herbs, seasonings, and dressings are included and make it special. The instructions for prep and cooking are clear and detailed. The dinners are absolutely delicious. The portions are large. There is flexibility as to quantity of meals you can order per week. Each meal serves two people. I am single. When I order four meals per week, I really get eight meals. I order four meals every other week. It works out well for me. I have learned some different ways of preparing foods, and I am eating healthier. I have never loved to cook, but I love to cook these dinners. Most of all, I love to eat them!”—Carol4.
GobbleWhy It’s Worth It:Meal kits inherently solve a problem in any hungry busy person’s life—lack of time to shop and decide what’s for dinner—but Gobble takes it a step further by doingallof the prep work for you. That means already-peeled vegetables, minimal-to-no chopping, and a process that goes from pan to plate in only about 15 minutes. It’s almost as low-effort as food delivery, and often even quicker.
Plus, we love that Gobble includes specialty menu options for people who are gluten-free, dairy-free, low-carb, and vegetarian, and emphasizes kid-friendly options for families. Sample meals include seared salmon with kale, Mexican squash flatbread with cotija cheese, and Chinese five-spice tofu with lime coconut vegetable stew.
Cost:$79 per week for three meals for two people; $151 per week for three meals for four people (both prices include shipping).
Availability:NationwideCustomer Review:“I love to cook and am a stickler about following quality recipes (usually the longer, more complicated way) so the end result is good. I don’t like any usual meal shortcuts like frozen meals, canned soup, most frozen veggies, etc. They don’t have a good taste or texture. It got hard to maintain that amount of work, and we started ordering delivery way more than we should have. I decided to give Gobble a try and just love it. The meals are high-quality, and everything about dinner is just easier: less decision-making, less shopping, less ingredient prep, less cooking time, fewer dishes, and very little food waste. I can be a picky eater, and there are always multiple menu options that I’m excited to try. Gobble’s also good about using seasonal produce and offering a variety of cuisine, so we’re not eating the same few meals over and over.” —Kati5.
Blue ApronWhy It’s Worth It:Blue Apron was the first to popularize the whole meal-kit-delivery-service thing, so it's had plenty of time to work out all the kinks and build up its repertoire of meals. Blue Apron’s recipes—like vegetable pad thai and harissa-baked chicken—are developed to keep cooking and prep time down to an average of 45 minutes. In fact, the directions are so easy to follow, one of our editors had her six-year-olds help her out. The company's mission is to improve our country’s food system at large by focusing on sustainable farming, direct shipping, and less food waste. Its chefs work directly with farmers to create the meal plans and provide the stories behind the ingredients so you know where your food actually came from.
As an added bonus, it offers a monthlywine subscriptionthat pairs specially-sized bottles with your meals. And if you’re not a meat eater, Blue Apron offers a vegetarian option for the two-person plan and recently addedBeyond Meat boxesto its roster so you can whip up a Beyond Burger at home. Sample recipes include customer favorites like orange beef and bok choy, cajun-spiced fish, and za’atar-roasted chicken.
Cost:$60 per week for three meals for two people; $96 per week for three meals for four people. Other plans are available on the site.
Availability:NationwideCustomer Review:“I LOVE Blue Apron!! Planning and cooking for one can be a real drag, but BA has solved that problem! Their recipes are wonderful, with surprising accents of flavor that I wouldn't think of using myself. The food is fresh, the meat and fish raised without hormones and/or sustainably sourced, the produce of top quality and the "knick knack" bags full of the small amounts of peppers, cheeses, spices, etc. that are new to me but bring that extra interest to a meal. I am no longer wasting food, because I'm not purchasing ingredients that then sit in my refrigerator, get pushed to the back and turn bad. I am eating healthier because everything I need for a restaurant-quality meal is right there, without going to the store to be sure I have every little ingredient. Joining BA has been, for me, a terrific decision!” —Patricia6.
FreshlyWhy It’s Worth It:If you're someone who feels overwhelmed by the prospect of cooking for yourself every day (very relatable), this plan is for you. Freshly meals arrive at your home fully cooked, and everything is designed to be ready to heat and serve in under three minutes—so you don’t have to order delivery yet again. Every meal is portioned out for one person in one sitting, though your own mileage may vary (since some of these are low-calorie meals). If you’re someone who gets super hungry, you might need to supplant meals with other sides to feel completely full.
Choose breakfast, lunch, or dinner from a weekly menu of rotating options; the entire menu is free of gluten and peanuts and produced in a gluten- and peanut-free facility, with options to select dairy-free meals too. Sample menu: golden oven-fried chicken and mash, pulled pork al pastor, and steak peppercorn.
Cost:$50 per week for four meals for one person and up to $108 per week for 12 meals (serves one). Other plans are available on the site.
Availability:Nationwide, excluding Alaska and HawaiiCustomer Review:“Freshly has changed our lives! With Freshly, we don’t have to go anywhere or wait for delivery, and our monthly food bill has been cut nearly in half. We love it.” —Dave7.
EveryPlateWhy It’s Worth It:EveryPlate prides itself on delivering affordable, delicious meals that even cooking novices could whip up by themselves. Meals on the basic plans net out to $5 per serving, and you can choose between enough to serve two or four people per meal. The goal is to make getting dinner on the table less complicated, so don’t expect gourmet meals—as it says on the company’s website, “our aim is to bring tasty value and convenience, not make you a chef.” Even so, the selection looks as delectable as any other meal-kit service’s. Sample recipes include a beef bibimbap bowl, apricot sriracha pork chops, and garlic rosemary chicken.
Cost:$39 per week for three meals for two people; $70 per week for three meals for four people (both prices include a delivery fee).
Availability:Available in most areas of the continental United States; input your zip code on the site to see your delivery options.
Customer Review:“I love EveryPlate. I get the meal plan for four, and we still have enough left over for a packed work lunch the next day. Everything is packed well and delivered super cold. The recipes have been great, always very tasty, quick, and easy. I work evenings, and I love being able to come home and put dinner on the table without stopping at the grocery store or getting takeout. And the most important factor to me is that I’m on a strict budget and still able to work with EveryPlate’s options and keep my food budget in line.” —Donna8.
Purple CarrotWhy It’s Worth It:Purple Carrot runs on plant power. If you are lactose-intolerant or don’t eat animal products, you’ll have plenty of variety to choose from here. Every single dish from Purple Carrot is not only vegetarian butvegan, too, with flavor to spare (no boring, tasteless grilled veggies here). This box features seasonal produce, herbs, and creative sauces that keep things interesting, and each meal comes prepped in a separate bag. Each week Purple Carrot chefs create a new selection of plant-based dishes, like cauliflower l’orange, broccoli-cheddar soup, and coffee teriyaki skewers, and provide a handy recipe book so you can follow the chef’s detailed instructions.
In addition to providing healthy and tasty food, Purple Carrot encourages users to appreciate the way eating plant-based meals is environmentally friendly, cutting down on water use and emissions compared with meat-based diets. Choose from quick-and-easy, high-protein, or chef’s choice plans. There’s also an option for athletes, called TB12, that features gluten-free recipes that are higher in protein and calories, but limited in soy and refined sugars.
Cost:$72 per week for three meals for two people; $120 per week for three meals for four people.
Availability:Nationwide, excluding Alaska and HawaiiCustomer Review:“I’m not vegetarian or vegan, but I really enjoy eating as much plant-based foods as possible. I get bored very easily making the same recipes over and over again. I kept seeing ads for Purple Carrot and finally decided to give them a try. Now I only wish I had tried them sooner! I actually enjoy the meals I make from Purple Carrot better than takeout. There is always a good selection of options in the weekly menu and I love how creative the dishes are. Every time I think I’ve tried the best recipe, they come out with something even better the next week. If you’re in a dinner slump like I was in and want to cook some exciting healthy plant-based food, I definitely recommend Purple Carrot! Since trying out Purple Carrot, I feel like a gourmet chef! I get lots of compliments on my meals and gained more confidence in the kitchen.” —Cait9.
Fresh and EasyWhy It’s Worth It:If you’re already familiar with Home Chef’s 30-minute home-cooking meal kit, prepare to be even more charmed by its new Fresh and Easy plan, which aims to make things even simpler. For the time-starved, Fresh and Easy’s meals come pre-portioned, sliced and diced, and ready to go in oven-safe trays, so you just need to pop them in the oven, set a timer, and grab the silverware. Cold options like salads are also in the mix and only need to be assembled and tossed. Cleanup is simpler than ever, and you don’t even have to worry about getting out your cutting board. Meal plans range from servings for two people to family-size options, and you can choose exactly how many meals you want to arrive per week.
Cost:$60 per week for three meals for two people; $119 per week for three meals for four people (prices include shipping). Other options are available on the site.
Availability:NationwideCustomer Review:“Home Chef’s Fresh and Easy meals are so delicious. There’s so much to choose from, and you can mix and match these family-friendly meals so everyone gets exactly what they want: I can have pad thai, and my husband can have a three-bean ancho chicken chili on the same night, with no actual cooking required. There are plenty of options, and everything arrives neatly with ice packs all around the meals. It’s so easy to pop them in the fridge and then heat them up when you’re ready for a fresh, filling meal.” —Ann10.
SakaraWhy It’s Worth It:This plant-based meal plan places an emphasis onhealthy nourishment, which is why you'll find that all ingredients are organic, and each meal is nutrient-dense, protein-rich, and plant-based. In addition to being healthy, Sakara's meals are also (importantly) delicious. While the meal plan is best known for its inventive salads and delightful salad dressings, you can also find a range of light meals and snacks for breakfast and lunch like gingerbread protein waffles with a spiced cranberry compote; a Thai basil buddha bowl with green coconut curry broth; and the Sichuan brown rice noodles with sesame-roasted carrots, kale and protein-packed white beans. In addition to its weekly menu (a.k.a. thesignature program), Sakara also offers a variety of munchable goodies, like mini protein bars and seed packs, to round out your orders.
Cost:$23 per day when ordering three meals per day for five days.
Availability:Nationwide, excluding Alaska and HawaiiCustomer Review:“This program is life-changing. After eating so incredibly for a month, I can't imagine eating any other way. Every detail was absolute perfection. The exceptional team at Sakara makes you feel like each meal and program was personally designed just for you. I found myself scraping every last ounce of food to ensure I soaked up the last bits of flavor.” —Elizabeth11.
Martha & Marley SpoonWhy It’s Worth It:Berlin-based meal-kit program Marley Spoon partnered with the domestic goddess herself, Martha Stewart, to bring you this curated, pre-portioned meal plan that helps you avoid waste. The concept is pretty straightforward: You decide whether you want to feed two or four people and how many meals you want delivered per week. Twenty-two new recipe options pop up every week, and boxes come with fresh ingredients and colorful recipe cards so you can follow along at home.
Meals are more ambitious than what you might make on the fly at home, but they’re still approachable, from seared steak and kale salad with Parmesan sweet potatoes to lemon-garlic chicken thighs with Brussels sprouts and feta pita crisps (don’t worry, there are vegetarian offerings too, like squash-and-kale flatbread with spicy garlic oil). The idea of this meal kit is that no recipe should take longer than 40 minutes to pull together. For those who want an easier dinner fix, there’s even a selection of 30-minute-and-under recipes.
Cost:$48 to $76 per week for a two-person plan; $76 to $139 for a four-person plan.
Availability:NationwideCustomer Review:“I have been with Martha and Marley for a while now—actually since COVID-19 started and I didn’t want to go to the grocery store. I have always loved to cook, and Martha and Marley are my new best friends. I started off with two meals a week, and now I’m up to four. Every single meal I have cooked deserves five stars. My husband loves the meals. I love the packaging, the recipe cards (I have started a recipe binder!). I love the seasoning packets, the freshness of the food, and that the ice is still frozen when you get your shipment. I’m getting a box today and can’t wait to unpack it. It’s like Christmas once a week.” —Caree12.
ButcherBoxWhy It’s Worth It:Perhaps you’ve got the regular groceries covered but want a meal delivery service that will send you premium cuts of meat and fish (so you don’t have to scour your local butcher or fish market). ButcherBox specializes in high-quality, humanely-raised meat and fish that are sourced from farms, fisheries, and pastures which uphold ethical standards for raising livestock. Choose from free-range organic chicken, fresh-caught seafood, heritage-bred pork, and grass-fed beef. The grass-fed beef comes all the way from Australia, while much of the fish and seafood is wild-caught in the North Atlantic. See more on ButcherBox’s sourcinghere.
Currently the meal delivery service offers four curated boxes—whether you prefer all-beef, or a mix of meats—and a popular Custom Box that includes up to 21 different cuts of your choosing (whew!). ButcherBox packages are packed with dry ice, so theyshould arriveeither partially frozen or refrigerator-cold.
Cost:Pre-curated boxes contain 8 to 11 pounds of meat and cost $129, and the custom box contains 9 to 14 pounds of meat and costs $149.
Availability:Nationwide, excluding Alaska and HawaiiCustomer Review:“I’ve been ordering from ButcherBox since 2018, and for the most part, it’s been good. I’ve never had a wrong order or one that came late or thawed. I’ve only skipped a month or so here or there, but I mostly like knowing what meat, chicken and pork I’ll be getting for the month and can build my meals around. So I try to order regularly. I really like the quality of the meat. The ground beef has very little fat. Rib eyes are tender and a uniform size. A one-pound pack of chicken thighs is just the right portion for us. I don’t order a lot of pork, but the ground pork is great for when I make my own breakfast sausage. I like that the bacon is sugar-free, and the thick-cut bacon is to die for! The quality of the meat for the last two years has been pretty consistent.” —Minnie13.
Very Good ButchersWhy It’s Worth It:If you follow a plant-based diet but still crave the taste of meat from time to time, Very Good Butchers (a rather misleading name) is here with all of the meat alternatives you could need to round out your dishes. Though not exactly a full-service meal kit with recipes and the like, you'll find an assortment of vegan grocery options that are created by chefs to be delicious, nutritious, and animal-friendly alternatives to regular meat. Its boxes (which come in a variety of sizes) include faux burgers, bratwurst, meatballs, pepperoni, taco meat, and every variety of sausages you can imagine. It even has gluten- and soy-free options in its lineup, as well. All products last four weeks in the fridge, and an entire year in the freezer.
In addition to vegan meat, you can also turn to The Very Good Butchers for vegan cheese. Its cheese box will liven up your charcuterie board with flavors like pepper jack, dill, gouda, and cheddar.
Cost:Boxes can be purchased individually or via subscription. Prices start at $50, and subscribers get 5% off any purchase.
Availability:United States and CanadaCustomer Review:“The large variety gives lots of meal options beyond just a burger. Examples are tacos, nachos, stir fry, pizza, chili/stew, pasta sauce, etc. I'm also a big fan of the environmentally-sound, biodegradable packing foam that melts in tap water and drains safely instead of finding a landfill or recycling plant. There are cheaper options, but they lack quality and taste that I’m willing to pay for because of what I get in this box.” —Ashley14.
CookUnityWhy It’s Worth It:If you're a food lover that craves the ease of Seamless, but are picky about eating the highest-quality (dare we even say Michelin-star quality?) meals, your best bet is CookUnity, a service that works with renowned chefs to get you food that's always delicious, and never boring. The service allows you to order in flavors from all over the world to your doorstep that are ready to heat and serve as soon as they're opened. They'll arrive fresh in compostable packaging, and new dishes drop every week for you to order up to two weeks in advance. Either search for meals by culinary artist or types of cuisine, and as a bonus, you can even see what ratings other users have given dishes, to help you taper down your selections each week. Standout selections include the bulgogi ramen by chef Esther Choi, the Impossible Burger on a brioche bun by chef Tony Perez, and the lamb kebabs with turmeric hummus and roasted sweet potatoes by chef Akhtar Nawab.
Cost:Prices depend on how many meals you get per week, but start at $10 a meal for 12 to 16 meals per week. That's about how much your standard takeout order would cost, if not less!Availability:CookUnity ships to most of the United States. You can check to see if you're within standard delivery zoneshere.
Customer Review:“I want to say that the crispy chicken milanese was among the most satisfying, enjoyable meals I ever had in my life. I realize this sounds like hyperbole, but I'm not at all a foodie. I would not let my partner talk after I finished the meal because I just wanted to sit with the memory of the taste. It really was that good.” —Howard15.
Snap KitchenWhy It’s Worth It:Austin-based company Snap Kitchen works with dietitians, chefs, and personal trainers to flesh out breakfast, lunch, and dinner options that are delicious and require absolutely zero prep. Pick from high-protein, keto-friendly, paleo, dairy-free meal kits, and more, then select a calorie goal, from 1,200 calories to 1,800 calories—or choose a flexible build-your-own option that lets you dabble.
Everything ships to you in a container with a recyclable plastic lid and compostable bottom, and meals come ready to plate and serve. Most meals require less than 20 minutes in the oven or microwave for reheating, so they’re sort of like an elevated version of television dinners. As an added bonus, all meals are also gluten-free. Popular meal options include chicken chile enchiladas, chimichurri beef, and almond-butter pancakes.
Cost:Depending on what type of meal plan you select, expect to spend between $29 to $39 per day, which includes three meals and two snacks.
Availability:Snap Kitchen is currently available in select states, including Texas, Oklahoma, Arkansas, Louisiana, Kansas, New Mexico, Pennsylvania, Connecticut, New Jersey, Maryland, Delaware, New York, Massachusetts, Virginia, and West Virginia.
Customer Review:“I get breakfast and lunch, sometimes a snack as well, five days a week, so that my work week is taken care of and I don’t have to think about what I’m going to be eating. It’s really helpful…. The biggest benefit for me is that it takes away my cravings. I don’t have cravings for sweets or soda anymore. I still have it every now and then, but I don’t go seeking it out in the grocery store.” —Jasmine16.
FlexProWhy It’s Worth It:Flex Pro's menu is centered on protein, and all of its protein-packed, chef-prpped meals arrive prepped and ready to go: All you have to do is pop them into the microwave for two to three minutes, and voilà, dinner (or lunch, or breakfast) is served.
You can tailor your weekly menu to your exact specifications (whether you're keto-friendly, low-carb, or want to skip out on gluten, dairy, or beef and pork), but look out for some of our favorites like the loaded buffalo chicken, which features juicy chicken thigh meat over cauliflower mashed potatoes, topped with a spicy buffalo sauce. Also worth mentioning is the service'spower bakery, which features a lineup of protein-packed cookies and sweet treats for dessert.
Shipping is so fast, the company bills itself as the Amazon Prime of meal delivery (no kidding!). Order Monday through Thursday before 3 p.m., and your meals will ship the same day you buy (and the next day on weekends).
Cost:$11 per meal for a minimum of seven meals per week. Meal prices fluctuate depending on how much you order, but cap off at $8 for 21 meals a week.
Availability:NationwideCustomer Review:“My experience with FlexPro Meals has been excellent. The food has met my expectations. Something I did not think I would experience was their dedication to customer service. Every meal package I receive, I also receive a follow up call from a FlexPro rep to ensure my order was correct, any issues they can assist me with and any updates from within the company a customer should be made aware of. Today, Lourdes provided me with a follow up call to make sure my satisfaction was met. I had a change of address issue and they made sure that my package was corrected and checked in to see if they can help in any way. Very much appreciated.” —Cory17.
Daily HarvestWhy It’s Worth It:We like to think of this delivery service as the grown-up, health-conscious version of a Cup O’Noodles because Daily Harvest’s smoothies, soups, oats, and bites are all quick and easy to make. Of course, the cauliflower-and-leek stew, pumpkin-and-chai oat bowl, and—our personal favorite—the cacao-and-avocado smoothie are a far cry from the ramen soup of our college days.
Daily Harvest'sfrozenlineup includes breakfast chia bowls, smoothie kits, deliciousdairy-free ice cream, flatbreads, and savory harvest bowls—but all the ingredients are fresh and organic (andvegan!). Plus, the flavor combinations are wonderfully inventive. In a move to make its packaging more eco-friendly, Daily Harvest has 100% compostable packaging.
Cost:$6 to $8 per cupAvailability:NationwideCustomer Review:“I’m so thankful for Daily Harvest. The food is well-packed and full of filling, clean (and delicious!) ingredients. Allergens are well-labeled, and it’s easy to determine which foods can meet your dietary preferences. The meals look small, but they’re more filling than they look. I started out ordering smoothies, then added soups to my order, and now I order flatbreads for dinner each night. They’re on the pricey side, but 100% worth it in my opinion. I’ve spent years trying out so many different meal delivery platforms, and this one is the best by far.” —Lauren18.
DinnerlyWhy It’s Worth It:If your primary concern is price point—meal kits do add up over time, after all—there’s also Dinnerly, the meal kit that bills itself as the “affordable meal kit.” The meal delivery service was originally launched in 2018 and is owned and operated by Marley Spoon (so you can expect the same quality food, as the two share the same suppliers).
There are 28 recipes to choose from, all of which require only a few ingredients. The meals are generally pretty straightforward to prepare, which is a big plus for people who aren't used to putting together meals for themselves. To keep things simple, you'll never have to worry about missing a recipe card, since Dinnerly posts all of its instructions online as well.
The meal kit offers a great selection of homestyle meals and comfort foods, like homestyle chicken and biscuits, or herbed pork cutlets served with mashed potatoes and gravy. This probably isn’t the kit for you if you’re a vegetarian (since the menu favors protein-heavy meat dishes, even offering protein packs with meat dishes), but there are a few veggie dishes in the mix, including a bean burrito casserole and tahini noodles with broccoli. Not everything needs to be made from scratch, either: Dinnerly also offers ready-made desserts and snacks like macarons and a cheese dip with crostini.
Cost:Meals start at $5. There is a minimum order charge of $44, and shipping on all boxes is $9. You're able to subscribe to a two-person box, or a family box (which serves four). Both are available in weekly boxes of three to six meals.
Availability:Nationwide, excluding Montana, North Dakota, Alaska, and HawaiiCustomer review:“The ingredients are always good quality, and there's lots of fresh produce options that show up in good shape. I love how I get simple ingredients to make something extra flavorful—like making a sauce with sour cream and garlic and lemon, rather than just being sent some pre-made sauce that I can't recreate. I love the price point. Dinnerly is also very sustainable to continue purchasing week after week, with minimal waste. We reuse the ice packs, the insulation is re-used paper products which is awesome.”—Janet19.
HungryrootWhy It’s Worth It:Hungryrootis a one-stop shop for meals, snacks, and groceries. Your monthly subscription gives you a set amount of credits that you can use in its grocery section or recipe section. The recipe section is similar most other meal kit experiences: You choose a dish, and Hungryroot provides all the necessary ingredients and a recipe guide.
But Hungryroot goes above and beyond, allowing you to modify each meal to fit your tastes. For example, let's say the Mediterranean Chicken Thighs + Sautéed Veggies catches your eye, but you'd prefer a different meat choice. You can click the recipe and swap out the chicken thighs for grass-fed beef meatballs, Beyond meatballs, or zucchini falafels. This easy-to-edit approach gives you a customizable experience, and the ability to tailor meals so you're truly love them. You can also swap out different types of noodles and sauces, as well.
All the recipes are simple to follow, with minimal steps. Not only that, many meals are ready in less than ten minutes. You can choose your portion sizes for two or four people.
In addition to meals, you can buy individual grocery items and snacks in the grocery section. Hungryroot consults chefs and customization experts for its well-stocked array of food that covers pretty much all your bases for breakfast, lunch, dinner, and everything in between (like tea time and snack time). There are Hungryroot-branded food staples as well as lots of other grocery items that you’d find in a fancy grocery store.
That includes lots and lots of building blocks for diets that have specific needs or exclusions, fromplant-based proteinslike Beyond Meat to wheat alternatives likeBanza pasta. And if you’re a meat lover or omnivore, don’t feel too left out. Hungryroot also offers a nice selection of lunch meats, chicken sausage, patties, wild-caught fish, and more. Other notable add-ons include a pantry section filled with Pukka teas, Purely Elizabeth granola, and pancake mixes—they really do have everything! See our full review of this meal servicehere.
Cost:$60 to $129 for weekly meal plans, plus $7 for shipping.
Availability:NationwideCustomer Review:“I love the offerings by this company! My children and I have truly enjoyed the dishes so far, and as a working mom, this simplifies things for me when I am running low on time and energy. I care about taste in addition to healthy dishes, and these are delicious and nutritious. The customize option is helpful when you want orders every other week or when you want to request specific dishes. I wish I had subscribed earlier!” —Christine20.
Splendid SpoonWhy It’s Worth It:Splendid Spoon creates soups, smoothies, grain bowls, and noodle dishes with wellness in mind. Every ready-to-eat meal is gluten-free, plant-based, and low in sugar and sodium. It may also be one of the most versatile meal kits on this list: Splendid Spoon allows you to choose from more than 50 meal options, with new offerings added on a regular basis. Filling dishes include the brown rice taco bowl with black beans and tomato salsa, or kale pesto noodles with roasted tomatoes and plant-based Parmesan. Prefer to drink your meal, instead? Try the green matcha smoothie with avocado and spirulina, or the orange hibiscus smoothie with maqui berries and chia seeds. Splendid Spoon has several subscription models, as well as an on-demand box that doesn't require a meal subscription.
Cost:Meals start at $9.
Availability:Nationwide, excluding Hawaii and AlaskaCustomer Review:“I love Splendid Spoon! I am a big fan of the soups and always have them in the freezer. They are my go-to lunch. They are healthy and delicious. I find that most pre-made soups (even the ones at ‘healthy’ stores) are over-salted and have a certain commercial taste that makes them unappealing. My favorite Splendid Spoon soups taste much more homemade and actually feel nurturing to eat. My husband is a big fan of the breakfast smoothies. The boxes always arrive intact and cold.” —Liza21.
YumbleWhy It’s Worth It:Yumble knows the struggle of gettingfussy kidsto actually eat their vegetables, or pulling together meals as a working parent (who may be tackling work and childcare at the same time right now), which is why it created a meal-kit service specifically catering to children between the ages of 1 and 12. Founded by Joanna Parker (a mother to three picky eaters), Yumble even consulted nutrition experts for its rotating menu of well-balanced lunches, dinners, and snacks for kids—all filled with regionally sourced fruits and veggies.
Meals include kid-menu favorites like chicken nuggets or mac n’ cheese with a side of veggies, and there’s even a specialty Picky Eater box that's designed to prevent any meltdowns at the dinner table. Yumble sends along boxes weekly with precooked meals so all you have to do is reheat or assemble on a plate when you get home from work. Easy-peasy. To keep kids engaged during meal times, you'll also findactivities for kidsto do while they eat, like sticker sheets, and table topics.
Cost:$24 per week for six meals to feed one kid; $48 per week for 12 meals to feed two kids (prices include shipping). Other options are available on the site.
Availability:Most of the East Coast, Texas, and parts of the West Coast and Midwest. Enter your zip code on the website to see your delivery options.
Customer Review:“I'm a single mom of two (a 3-year-old and 5-year-old). I work full-time and I attend school online full time. I have to squeeze every minute out of my day to get everything done. Cooking became a chore and a giant time-suck, and that was made even worse when my kids wouldn't eat anyway. As a mother, I obviously want my kids to eat healthy, wholesome meals and not fast food and junk, so Yumble has become a perfect solution for us. The best part is that each of my kids can pick out whatever they want to eat and it doesn't take me any extra time or money to let them do that. I was feeling guilty at some points that I wasn't measuring up as a parent because I wasn't able to set aside time to plan and prepare meals every night. But now my kids are happy, we are all less stressed out, their bellies are full every night, and I get to keep my sanity!” —Brianna22.
MosaicWhy It’s Worth It:The Mosaic mission is to put good food on every table—"good" here meaning veggie-packed, nutritious meals sourced from whole foods. Each plant-based meal features produce and whole grains mindfully harvested in New York's Hudson Valley without any artificial ingredients or preservatives. Meals arrive frozen, ready to heat and serve.
Mosaic offers single-serving bowls, or family-style meals that serve four—the family-size meals are great if you find that normal meal kit dishes aren't quite filling enough for one person, too. Standouts include the Tuscan pesto bowl (with purple cauliflower, squash, and avocado pesto) and the penne alla vodka. Mosaic also gives back to its community: For every Mosaic box sold, the company donates two pounds of nutritious food to help New Yorkers in need.
Cost:Meals start at $9, and each box has a $70 minimum.
Availability:New York, Washington, D.C., Philadelphia, Baltimore, Boston, and the surrounding areas.
Customer Review:“I truly love your meal service. I was expecting the meals to taste fresh, but was not expecting them to be so tasty. I was used to heated from frozen vegetables to be soggy and bland, and I got none of that with your product. The herbs and spices are an exciting delicious combination, and I haven't been disappointed yet with the selection. One other thing, because I'm a pretty big guy, I was expecting that the portion size wouldn't suit me. Either I would not feel full after eating the meal, or I would feel hungry within a half hour after eating. Neither has proven to be the case. I'm truly satisfied, and have enjoyed the meals enormously. You guys rock! Thank you for your service. Oh, one other thing, because I'm a Master Chef at reheating, I can have my meal within 5-6 minutes from the microwave. For me, this is incredibly convenient and an added bonus.” —Timothy23.
Nurture LifeWhy It’s Worth It:If you want to feed your littles delicious and nutritious meals, but don't have the time (or desire) to meal prep, Nurture Life is the solution. All of its nutritionally balanced, chef-made meals are made with antibiotic-free proteins and organic vegetables. The fresh (never frozen) meals are delivered to your doorstep, ensuring peak flavor and nutrition. There are two kinds of meals you can choose from: Finger foods (which are small and soft enough to prevent choking) that aredesigned for babies10 months and older who have graduated from puree. Then, there are kids' meals, which are proper plates designed for toddlers and children.
Parents love Nurture Life for how healthy it is, and kids love howtastythe meals are. Some of the most popular meals include the chicken meatballs with spiral pasta and the oven-baked chicken bites. Finger food favorites include the mini shell bolognese with carrots and crowd-pleasers like mac and cheese with peas.
There are a range of weekly plans available, from six meals all the way up to 15, and all dishes are ready to serve in one minute (talk about easy!).
Cost:$6 to 7 per meal. Weekly plans of 12 meals earn a $10 discount, and the 15-meal plan earns a $15 discount.
Availability:NationwideCustomer Review:“I love this meal service. I am a full time working mom and this helps me provide well balanced meals with veggie sides that are different and not all the same! It makes my life sooo much easier! It has also gotten my very picky five year old to eat some new things and not be confined to the same old meals. I love this. It is packaged in plastic which I’m not huge on but I just put on a plate & heat. I have tasted some of the meals and they were really yummy! My daughter loves them! I am also loving the hidden veggies in the Mac. They are very accomplishing, initially my order was late bc of an issue on a main highway, and they credited my account. Love this service I buy 9-11 meals per week! For two kids this makes my life soo much easier! Perfect portion sizes.” —Rachel24.
HelloFreshWhy It’s Worth It:HelloFresh lets you pick from curated chef boxes, plusvegetarian-friendlyand family-style boxes, to create meals ranging in difficulty on a scale of one to three (don't worry, they’re all very low-lift). You can try mahi mahi piccata, garlic-butter shrimp, or even butternut squash agnolotti with kale. What's more, vegan or vegetarian eaters can set their meal preferences to cut out meat and seafood.
Additionally, you have options like “fit” meals, which are the three most nutritionally dense recipes of the week; quick meals, which take 30 minutes max to make; or variety meals, which according to the brand feature “recipes that showcase new ingredients and techniques for those craving something different (but still quick and totally doable).” It’s kind of like your own private cooking-skills class. The meal kits are designed to fit easily in the fridge, which is super convenient. Choose from classic or family plans, depending on how many mouths you're looking to feed.
Cost:$60 per week for three meals for two people; $96 per week for three meals for four people (prices include shipping). Other options are available on the site.
Availability:NationwideCustomer Review:“This service has surpassed any of my expectations! I use HelloFresh for meal prep for my lunches for the week, and it’s made life so easy for me. Choosing a plan and your weekly recipes is so easy. I love that you have access to other recipes through the app, too. All of my meals have been delivered in a timely manner, and when one shipped out late due to the holiday rush, I was compensated with free garlic bread, without even asking! The best way to win my heart is through free bread. The recipes are delicious and packed full of flavor, the quality of ingredients is exceptional, and I love the easy-to-follow directions printed on large colorful cards that I get to keep. I plan on sticking with Hello Fresh for a while. I highly recommend!”—Kjersti25.
FactorWhy It’s Worth It:Factor’s menu of ready-to-eat meals is constantly evolving. Every week it switches it up with a new rotation of meals: You can pick and choose what you like, or if you want to save time, Factor can personalize your order based on your meal history and taste preferences. The meals come fully prepared; all you have to do is pop them into the microwave and enjoy.
Choose from comfort foods (like shepherd’s pie), filling breakfasts (like a sweet potato bowl bursting with veggies), protein-packed snack plates, or healthy dinners (like a garlic Parmesan chicken breast paired with green beans and cherry tomatoes). Factor also offers meals that fit into keto, paleo, carb-conscious, plant-based, vegetarian, and high-protein diets. As for ingredients, Factor is very careful about sourcing—using only organic produce, cage- and antibiotic-free eggs and poultry, or grass-fed and pasture-raised meat. Even its salmon is certified according to the Best Aquaculture Practices.
Cost:$11 to $15 per meal, based on quantity. Plans start at $60 per week for four meals for one person. Other plans are available on the site.
Availability:Nationwide, excluding Alaska and HawaiiCustomer Review:“These meals are some of the most delicious foods I have ever had. Every piece of chicken has been cooked better than I have ever been able to and its out of the microwave. They offer many different meals every week and each meal comes with full nutritional facts which really helps with carb counting. The keto meals (which is what I normally stick to) are better than any I could think to make and even foods I would never cook (like mushrooms) are delicious. The sides always compliment the main dish. The ease, variety, quality, and flavor of these meals has kept me to continue my subscription. The only downside of these meals would be the price. At about $12 a meal, it is a little pricy, but for that cost, it's about the cost of take out and these meals are far better tasting and quality than most take out. If you are on the fence, I recommend trying the meal for a week yourself. You won't be disappointed.”—Alec26.
VeestroWhy It’s Worth It:Here’s another plan that's ideal for people who don’t love to prep and cook. Veestro’s meals are 100% plant-based and made fresh with organic ingredients (with plenty of options for vegans). You can select 10 to 30 meals per week and tailor your menu to suit your needs. Pick and choose your favorites or, if you’re down to dabble, select the Chef’s Choice option to simply receive a box of the most popular meals on Veestro, including tasty selections like breakfast burritos, pasta bolognese, and Spanish tortas. Everything arrives ready to eat with no prep (other than heating) required.
Cost:From $10 per meal, based on quantity. Plans start at $117 per week for 10 meals for one person. Other plans are available on the site.
Availability:Nationwide, excluding Alaska and HawaiiCustomer Review:“This is absolutely the best vegetarian food I have ever had! I’ve tried three or four different places where I can get my food made for me and just heat it up and eat! Nothing compares to Veestro! The food is outstanding! The other places I have ordered from the packages were smashed or the food looks awful. I can’t tell you the difference this is. Don’t miss out! And don’t waste your time with the rest! go for the best!” —Janice27.
Little SpoonWhy It’s Worth It:Like Yumble, this meal delivery service understands that busy parents don’t always have the time to pull together nutritious meals for their kids, especially if they’re still juggling childcare and working from home these days. While Yumble offers solid foods fortoddlersand children, Little Spoon extends its meal plans to the littlest members of our families. Meals are best known for their range of pureed organic baby food, or Babyblends, that read like delicious smoothies: beet banana mango; pitaya pineapple spinach banana coconut oil; and carrot mango coconut milk turmeric are just a few of the fruit and veggie blends they offer.
The perks of receiving ready-made baby food are many for anew momwho doesn’t have the time tomake her own, and you can rest assured that Little Spoon’s food is of the highest quality for your little one, sourced from organic fruits and veggies, without any preservatives or additives. Each Little Spoon meal plan is personalized, developed with the help of pediatricians, and will adapt to your baby’s needs. Little Spoon takes into account your baby’s developmental history to deliver a selection of curated meals for your baby in each shipment.
The brand also recently expanded into food fortoddlers and childrenas well, with plenty of “hidden veggies” in each. All of its dishes sound very grown-up, while still factoring in things kids love. Meals include chicken potstickers with a quinoa-veggie stir-fry and edamame, cauli croquettes with veggie millet poppers and carrots, and a three cheese tortellini with kale pesto.
Cost:The Babyblends plan starts at $3 per meal, while “plates” for kids and toddlers start at $5 per meal.
Availability:Nationwide, excluding Alaska and Hawaii.
Customer Review:“Little Spoon is one of the first foods Dallas ate and she absolutely loved all of the flavors! After reading that most baby food has been on shelves had been there as long as Dallas has been alive, I decided I needed to be more conscious about what I feed her. Little Spoon’s food is fresh and packed with the nutrients that Dallas needs in order to grow strong and healthy. I love the yummy flavors, too. Her favorite so far are the beets, apple and rice! I stand behind Little Spoon and Dallas definitely approves! We look forward to new meals to try with each shipment!” —Dallas28.
Fresh DirectWhy It’s Worth It:If there’s a company that knows a thing or two about delivering food to hungry humans, it’s Fresh Direct. This meal service makes it simple to pick up a meal kit while you shop by listing meal kits like any other product on its site. Choose one, select the quantity you want (most meals serve two, some serve a family), then add it to your cart and schedule your delivery. While you’re at it, you can pick out a bunch of other snacks, beverages, and miscellaneous grocery items and add-ons, since Fresh Direct is more of a grocery purveyor than a meal-kit service. Crowd-pleasers include stir-fry andtacos, and the best part is, you can whip up your dinner in as little as 20 minutes—one of the fastest prep times we found. (As you scroll through the available options, Fresh Direct will give you estimates for cook times.)Cost:$10 and up for one serving; each meal kit serves two.
Availability:Only in the NortheastCustomer Review:“Fresh Direct's food is always fresh and nicely packaged. I love their meal kits and baked goods. They also have many items that you can’t buy at a regular store, and I love the convenience of not going grocery shopping.” —Maria29.
Crowd CowWhy It’s Worth It:For certified carnivores, or people who just want the highest quality meat and seafood around, Crowd Cow offers premium-quality, sustainably-sourced meat and seafood from family farms and co-ops for your next barbecue or surf-and-turf meal. Choose from heritage-breed pork, pasture-raised chicken, grass-fed beef, pasture-raised beef, wild-caught seafood, lamb, and waygu that are free of any added hormones. Instead of pre-selected cuts, you get to curate the contents of each box, and if you need inspiration for recipes, its website offers dozens ofcooking guidesto help you make the most of your order.
Cost:Since each box is completely customizable, prices vary widely. Members receive a 5% discount on all products, as well as free shipping on orders of $99 or more. Membership is free, and members can adjust, reschedule, or skip their monthly box.
Availability:Nationwide, excluding Alaska and HawaiiCustomer Review:“We’re gonna need a bigger freezer. I just got our steakhouse classics pack, and New York steak mix, today from Crowd Cow. We had chuck-eye steaks last week, and dang if those weren’t the bomb. The chuck-eye might be the ‘runt’ of the rib-eye steaks, but you wouldn’t know if from these cuts. Also, I got more hamburger patties since those are to die for! I can’t wait to try those rib-eye steaks and the tenderloin.” —Mark30.
TerritoryWhy It’s Worth It:If you're looking for something with bigger portions than your typical heat-and-serve meals provide, Territory is just the service. Its meals are filling and delicious, and its menus offer a ton of customization based on your dietary preferences (including vegan, low-carb, plant-based, low-fat, keto-friendly, whole30, paleo, and Mediterranean options). Most meal delivery services deliver once per week, but Territory also allows you get two delivery per week if you prefer, so the meals are at their absolute freshest when they show up at your door. There are more than 50 meals at your disposal—designed by dietitians and crafted by chefs—like red coconut curry tofu, harvest bowls, and tagine chicken. Territory also partners with a variety of nonprofits to donate meals to the hungry.
One of our health editors tried Territory first-hand, saying, “The food was tasty, very aligned to my dietary needs, and filling. If you’re looking for a well-rounded, nutrition-packed takeout alternative, Territory is a very solid choice.” Read her full reviewhere.
Cost:Order up to 18 meals a week. Meals start at $10, and full market boxes start at $35.
Availability:Washington D.C., New York City, Philadelphia, Houston, Southern California, and San Francisco.
Customer Review:“I don't ever cook healthy meals, so this has been the best way for me to eat healthy and not have to go through the whole 'making dinner' process. Plus, the sauces are so yummy. I find meals I like (there are like five Ilove) and basically stick with those. Occasionally I'll get creative with a meal or two, but not too often. I know it's pretty reasonably priced, but it's a bit more than I should spend, but it's worth the convenience.” —Daren31.
Fresh N' LeanWhy It’s Worth It:Whether you're looking forpaleo,vegan, keto, or high-protein options, prepared meal service Fresh N' Lean has you covered. Made with organic, locally sourced produce and humanely raised meats, these meals arrive to your door chilled in an insulated box. All you have to do is reheat them as little as three minutes before dinner time (or breakfast or lunchtime, for that matter). Fresh N' Lean offers meals that will taste great and nourishing any time of day, like a dinner of grass-fed steak with spiced cauliflower and brown rice, or a breakfast of egg whites with maple turkey sausage. On top of these mouthwatering meals, you can also add up to two free snacks to your order.
Cost:$8 per meal.
Availability:Nationwide.
Customer Review:“Delicious meals and could not be any easier! The delivery and customer service have been excellent and we are really enjoying the food. Particularly the plant-based “meat” options. Maintaining a vegan diet can be challenging when you have limited time for grocery shopping and meal prep. But with Fresh and Lean, a healthy vegan meal or snack is ALWAYS readily available and a cinch to prepare. Love it!!!”—Marci32.
Proper GoodWhy It’s Worth It:For the days when you don't realize you're hungry until you're downright ravenous, Proper Good will be your port in the storm. ThisShark Tank–featured company is known for its shelf-stable soups in such mouth-watering varieties as chicken and vegetable, broccoli cheddar, and spiced pumpkin. It also offers chilis, bone broths, sides, and oatmeals (which come in fruit and cinnamon flavors that would certainly get us up and going in the morning). The best part? These hearty meals are ready in less than two minutes. Just pop them in the microwave and get ready to enjoy a piping hot bowl of oats (or whatever your meal of choice may be). You can make one-time purchases as you need, or subscribe for monthly deliveries and enjoy a 15% discount on each order.
Cost:Meals start at $5.99, or $5.09 with subscription.
Availability:Nationwide.
Customer Review:“I really enjoyed the soup both were delicious. The meatball minestrone made my whole house smell amazing. [The] meatballs were filled with flavor and had the perfect amount of meat. The flavors were all amazing it didn't need anything added it was perfect. Not only was the soup fantastic but the quality of the broth mixed with the veggies was filling and scrumptious. I cannot wait to get my next package of soup. I look forward to try all the different flavors and ingredients."—Jessica33.
Pete's PaleoWhy It’s Worth It:Ultra-seasonal, high-quality ingredients are the number-one priority at Pete's Paleo, the always gluten-free meal delivery service developed by a classically trained chef. The weekly menu changes with the time of year, according to what produce is locally available from the company's partner farms, and features tasty dishes like braised Thai pork with vegetables and chorizo spaghetti squash carbonara. In addition to the standard paleo meal plan, there are several other delicious options to get Pete's Paleo food delivered to you: The Eat What You Love menu lets you choose exactly what you want; the Breakfast Bundle delivers five paleo-compliant breakfasts; and bacon and bone broth are available a la carte as either one-time or recurring orders.
Cost:Plans start at $100 per week.
Availability:Nationwide.
Customer Review:“After many attempts to find a healthy, reliable and convenient meal delivery company with great tasting food, I can confidently say my search ended right here at Pete's Paleo. The website is easy to navigate and ordering is straightforward. The several orders I have placed have all been correct, delivered when promised and always in a safe frozen condition. To top it all of, restaurant quality taste. I can comment on the above because my experience was not the same with the multiple other meal providers I tried. The only warning I can give about Pete's Paleo is regarding the bacon...be forewarned, once you try it, you will never be satisfied with regular store bought bacon again.”—Steve34.
Farmer's FridgeWhy It’s Worth It:Packaged in clear, reusable plastic jars, the ready-to-eat meals from Farmer's Fridge are perfect for healthy eating on the go. They're made from scratch in the company's own Chicago-based kitchen, and contain responsibly grown (organic when possible) ingredients. And, with options like a truffle couscous bowl, green goddess salad, and Thai noodle bowl, we'd happily enjoy these meals anywhere. AsSELF previously reported, Farmer's Fridge started offering home delivery during the pandemic. Originally, its premade meals could be found in one of over 400 “smart” fridges, which function like meal vending machines, around the country. Those fridges are still working nationwide to make healthy, fresh meals accessible and easy to pick up as part of your day. To find your nearest fridge, enter your zip codehere.
Cost:Smaller meals, breakfasts, and snacks start around $6, while meals start at $8.
Availability:Ships to over 40 states, with delivery also available through GoPuff and otherfood-delivery apps and services.
Customer Review:"I just got my first delivery from Farmer’s Fridge. Everything I ordered has exceeded my expectations. All the items were carefully packed and arrived in perfect condition.
First of all, those cookie dough bites, are to die for! The breakfast yogurt berry bowls were delicious. The grilled chicken Caesar salads were super generous portions, loads of tasty, moist chicken, fresh greens, just the right amount of cheese, outstanding dressing and the crispy chickpeas. I also ordered the Buffalo chicken salads, but we haven’t had those yet.
I haven’t even finished this box and can’t wait to get the next one!"—Ellen35.
TrifectaWhy It’s Worth It:Trifecta's customizable delivery service can send you three square meals a day if you want, or your can tailor its cadence and meals to your liking (maybe you just want dinners, or only need lunches during the week). While this service is great for people who know what they want when they want it, Trifecta can also help those who are on the fence about what menu is right for them. Its meal quiz will give you a better idea of whether you should order the Clean Meal, paleo, keto, vegan, or vegetarian meal plan. Whichever you choose, you can rest assured that the meals will be flavorful, healthy, and made with top-notch, whole foods.
Cost:Plans start at $100 per week for seven meals.
Availability:Nationwide.
Customer Review:“I think if I would’ve tried to meal prep on my own, I would’ve failed. Based on the mindset I was trying to ditch (being in a depression), I would’ve stopped caring after a day or two because it’s so difficult. Trifecta just made it so easy.”—Beth36.
Good EggsWhy It’s Worth It:You can get pre-made meals, ready-to-eat snacks, and wholesome groceries all at once when you order from Good Eggs. Based in the Bay Area, this hybrid delivery service offers weeknight meals that come together in 20 minutes (like the sesame chicken salad with satsumas), as well as recipes that take an hour or more (like the Instant Pot chicken congee), for days when you can savor your time in the kitchen. As mentioned earlier, regular groceries like fruits, veggies, dairy products, baked goods, and more are available for purchase, too, and come fresh and ethically sourced from local farmers and suppliers.
Cost:Meals start at $6, and orders have a $30 minimum.
Availability:San Francisco.
Customer Review:“Good Eggs has been a source of quality and well-curated items for me and my family for a number of years now. We keep coming back to Good Eggs because of the consistently positive experience. What stands out for me is the customer service I receive when I inform them of an issue with an item which happens occasionally — in their response they make me feel very much appreciated as an important regular customer and they immediately rectify the situation. Their emails are courteous, prompt and caring. I truly value the convenience and the quality groceries delivered to my doorstep. The delivery people are friendly and warm - an important component of their good brand. As I browse through their website, I also get a nice education about the many impressive vendors and merchants that Good Eggs works with. A win-win situation for all sides.”—ChrisRelated:You Might Also Like: 11 Spices Everyone Should Have in Their PantrySELF does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Any information published on this website or by this brand is not intended as a substitute for medical advice, and you should not take any action before consulting with a healthcare professional.
Sign up for our SELF Healthy Eating newsletterMore from SelfContact© 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of ourUser AgreementandPrivacy Policy and Cookie StatementandYour California Privacy Rights.
SELFmay earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
Ad Choices
