old id = 4223
Habitat on the Edges: Making Room for Wildlife in an Urbanized World - Yale E360
2018
https://e360.yale.edu/features/habitat-on-the-edges-making-room-for-wildlife-in-an-urbanized-world

/←→Yale Environment 360Published at theYale School of the EnvironmentLuisa Rivera / Yale e360Habitat on the Edges: Making Room for Wildlife in an Urbanized WorldEfforts to protect biodiversity are now focusing less on preserving pristine areas and more on finding room for wildlife on the margins of human development. As urban areas keep expanding, it is increasingly the only way to allow species to survive.
ByRichard Conniff•January 3, 2018One morning not long ago, in the southern Indian state of Karnataka, I traveled with a Wildlife Conservation Society biologist on a switchback route up and over the high ridge of the Western Ghats. Our itinerary loosely followed the corridor connecting Bhadra Tiger Reserve with Kudremakh National Park 30 miles to the south.
In places, we passed beautiful shade coffee plantations, with an understory of coffee plants, and pepper vines — a second cash crop — twining up the trunks of the shade trees. Coffee plantations managed in this fashion, connected to surviving patches of natural forest, “provide continuous camouflage for the predators,” — especially tigers moving through by night, my guide explained, and wildlife conflict was minimal. Elsewhere, though, the corridor narrowed to a thread winding past sprawling villages, and conservationists played a double game, part handholding to help people live with large predators on their doorsteps, part legal combat to keep economic interests from nibbling into the wildlife corridor from both sides. It was a microcosm of how wildlife hangs on these days, not just in India, but almost everywhere in the world.
For conservationists, protecting biodiversity has in recent years become much less about securing new protected areas in pristine habitat and more about making room for wildlife on the margins of our own urbanized existence. Conservation now often means modifying human landscapes to do double-duty as wildlife habitat — or, more accurately, to continue functioning for wildlife even as humans colonize them for their homes, highways, and farms. There is simply no place else for animals to live.
The ambition to create new protected areas still persists, of course. National parks, wildlife refuges, and other protected areas remain essential, especially forspecies that do not adapt wellto human-dominated landscapes. The 168 signatory nations to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) have acknowledged as much, at least on paper, committing to extend protected area coverage to 17 percent of their land area by 2020. But getting there has proved difficult. Coverage by national parks and other terrestrial protected areas has remained stuck for the past few years at about 15 percent worldwide, well short of CBD commitments, much less E.O. Wilson’s grander vision of“half-Earth”set aside for nature.
Meanwhile, though, work to improve buffer zones around parks, and to establish corridors on the land between existing protected areas, has flourished. For instance:The 250-acre Gardens by the Bay park in Singapore. Nearly half of Singapore's land is comprised of green space and nature preserves.
Martin/FlickrALSO ON YALE E360Can a monarch highway help save a species under siege?Read more.
The idea of making human-dominated landscapes more wildlife-friendly dates back at least to the 1970s, when the anti-lawn movement proselytized for turning backyards into habitat. But finding ways — large and small — for wildlife to live among us has come to seem dramatically more urgent in recent years. That may be partly because in this centuryHomo sapienshas become a predominately urban species for the first time in history, with huge projected growth in cities and megacities. It may also be due to a series of recent studies on the implications of that growth. These studies read, at times, as if the researchers are looking up from their data and describing the end of the natural world.
ALSO ON YALE E360What's causing the sharp decline in insects, and why it matters.
Read more.
Even scientists were stunned in October by the report of a mass insect die-off in Germany. That study,published in the journal PLOS One, found that over a 27-year period, from 1989 to 2016, the population of flying insects at nature reserves across Germany had collapsed, down by 76 percent overall, and 82 percent in the peak mid-summer flying season. Most of the likely causes — including habitat fragmentation, deforestation, monoculture farming, and overuse of pesticides — were factors outside the borders of these ostensibly protected areas. “We appear to be making vast tracts of land inhospitable to most forms of life,” one co-author grimlycommented, “and are currently on course for ecological Armageddon.”That came on the heels ofa July reportin theProceedings of the National Academy of Sciencesdescribing a “biological annihilation” in which “as much as 50% of the number of animal individuals that once shared Earth with us are already gone,” with likely “cascading catastrophic effects on ecosystems,” and on economic and social services “vital to sustaining civilization.” In particular, global vertebrate populations — from elephants to amphibians — declined by 58 percent from 1970 to 2012,a 2016 reportnoted, with losses likely to reach 67 percent by 2020. That’s two-thirds of all vertebrate animals on Earth vanished in the lifetime of a person not yet 50.
A female mountain lion in the Verdugos Mountains, north of Los Angeles. Also known as cougars, these animals are an increasingly common sight in the mountains surrounding Southern California's cities.
National Park ServiceIn the face of “annihilation” and “Armageddon,” emphasis on tending the margins of our lives can seem, yes, marginal. “If the focus is on degraded landscapes – roadside edges, powerline rights of way – you can find examples where these habitats are important to particular species,” says Josh Tewksbury, a conservation biologist at the University of Colorado, Boulder. “But it would be hard to find any evidence that it’s going to make a whit of difference to the big problem. It’s not going to solve 95 percent of the problem.”Then, as a second thought, he added, “It could be the 95 percent solution for people and biodiversity,” in the sense that routinely seeing birds in a city park, or a fox running across a field, can have “big implications for how people think about the value of nature.” And changes in human attitudes about nature can have dramatic effects on the ability of wildlife to survive in human-dominated landscapes.
For instance, persistence of old cultural attitudes is the major reason wolf recovery has struggled in the U.S., despite an abundance of available land. Meanwhile, Europe, one of the most industrialized landscapes on earth, has welcomed the return of wolves even to the fringes of its largest cities — along with brown bears, lynx, bison, and other species. The surprisingly rapid recovery of such species in Europe has led to a call, as arecent commentaryin the journalConservation Lettersput it, for rewilding to become “a primary component” of long-term biodiversity conservation on degraded landscapes elsewhere — even perhaps everywhere.
But caution about the potential of our cities and suburbs as wildlife habitat is probably still a good idea. One danger is that these landscapes may become “ecological sinks” — that is, places where excess individuals from undisturbed habitat can survive, but not ultimately increase. Having straw-headed bulbuls in central Singapore does not, for instance, ensure survival of the species. Success with some more visible species may also blind us to broader but less obvious declines in other species. European rewilding, for instance, has not been rewilding for its insect population.
ALSO ON YALE E360Utilities are now managing power transmission lines as valuable corridors for threatened wildlife.
Read more.
Finally, we know almost nothing about what ecologist Meredith Holgerson at Portland State University calls “these cryptic changes happening” as humans occupy and alter a landscape. For her doctoral research at Yale University, she looked atthe effects of suburbanizationon wood frogs in 18 ponds in the prosperous Connecticut suburb of Madison. The area around the ponds had developed largely with two-acre zoning, allowing for survival of “pretty good red maple swamps and vernal ponds,” says David Skelly, a professor of ecology at the Yale School of Forestry & Environmental Studies who oversaw the research. But chemical analysis of the ponds demonstrated that, along with other changes, the wood frog larvae were getting as much as 70 percent of their nutrients from materials leaching out of septic systems. “It suggests,” says Holgerson, “that tadpoles and other pond organisms are made up of human waste.”The consequences of that remain unknown. But it also suggests that we may change the entire nutrient flow of an ecosystem, cause eutrophication, or introduce hormone-disrupting drugs or other chemicals in our waste — and still imagine that we live in a relatively intact habitat.
Richard Conniffis a National Magazine Award-winning writer whose articles have appeared inThe New York Times, Smithsonian, The Atlantic, National Geographic, and other publications. His latest book isHouse of Lost Worlds: Dinosaurs, Dynasties, and the Story of Life on Earth. He is a frequent contributor toYale Environment 360.
Moreabout Richard Conniff→TopicsRegionsNever miss a feature! Sign up for the E360 Newsletter →Related ArticlesOPINIONBeyond Magical Thinking: Time to Get Real on Climate ChangeByVaclav SmilSalt Scourge: The Dual Threat of Warming and Rising SalinityByFred PearcePanama’s Indigenous Groups Wage High-Tech Fight for Their LandsByJim O’Donnell and Cullen HeaterMore From E360OPINIONBeyond Magical Thinking: Time to Get Real on Climate ChangeINTERVIEWHow Ailing Strip Malls Could Be a Green Fix for U.S. Housing CrisisClimateSalt Scourge: The Dual Threat of Warming and Rising SalinitySolutionsPanama’s Indigenous Groups Wage High-Tech Fight for Their LandsPollutionIn the Wake of Coup, Gold Mining Boom Is Ravaging MyanmarINTERVIEWFor Gen Z, Climate Change Is a Heavy Emotional BurdenCitiesA Quiet Revolution: Southwest Cities Learn to Thrive Amid DroughtANALYSISHow U.S. Gas Exports to Europe Could Lock in Future EmissionsPolicyWhy Are Nature-Based Solutions on Climate Being Overlooked?INDUSTRYAmid Hopes and Fears, a Plastics Boom in Appalachia Is On HoldBiodiversityBringing Back Fire: How Burning Can Help Restore Eastern LandsBiodiversityWild Sounds: The Loss of Sonic Diversity and Why It MattersE360Published at theYale School of the EnvironmentScience-based, fact-checked, environmental journalism is more important than ever.
But we can not do it without your support.
Donate today.
