old id = 4809
Privacy Policy - MarvellousMe
2018
https://marvellousme.com/privacy-policy

Privacy Policy & Cookies.
IntroductionMarvellousMe Limited (‘we’ ‘us ‘our’) is committed to protecting and respecting your privacy and the personal data you entrust to us.
This is the privacy and cookies policy for the MarvellousMe website and mobile applications (‘Policy’) – that is, for the website at www.marvellousme.com (referred to as the ‘website’) and each of our mobile applications that we make available from time to time (each of which is referred to as an ‘app’). The website and apps are operated and provided by us and our address and other details are set out below, should you wish to contact us.
For the purposes of the Data Protection Act 2018 (DPA 18) and any applicable national legislation implementing or supplementing the GDPR, in relation to the protection of personal data and/or any corresponding or equivalent national legislation in any relevant jurisdiction (once in force and applicable), we are the data controller in relation to the personal data that you provide when using the website and the apps.
We fully appreciate that you do not want any personal information provided to us to be used in an inappropriate way, and here we explain how we collect information, what we do with it and what controls you have.
By giving your unambiguous informed consent to the terms of this Policy, and using the website or any app, you agree to the collection and use of information in accordance with this Policy. This includes how we will use any information we collect or hold in relation to any contract we are obliged to perform with or in relation to you, including with the relevant school, or where it is in the legitimate interests of MarvellousMe to hold or collect such information.
We reserve the right to change this privacy policy from time to time by changing it on the website or updating the relevant app. If we do so, we shall notify all registered users accordingly.
Please read the following carefully. This privacy policy was last updated in January 2021.
What our website and apps doOur website and apps are intended to provide an easy and enjoyable way for teachers at schools to share information about what pupils have done at school with the parents of the pupils concerned, in order to assist with communication and interaction between schools and the parents of the pupils and to provide ideas and resources to help parents continue their children’s learning at home.
In this privacy policy,user(also referred to as ‘you’) refers to a school, teacher or parent (which includes anyone who is fulfilling the role of parent, such as a legal guardian) who is registered to use the website or the apps, and to any other person who may use them from time to time, andpupilrefers to any pupil about whom personal information is uploaded to the website or the app by registered users, but who may not use the website or the app themselves.
Information we may collectWe collect personal information from a number of sources:We will not collect any information directly from pupils. The only information that we will collect or process relating to pupils at schools will be that information which is provided to us by the schools, which warrant they have permission to provide us with such information, or teachers and parents in the course of using the website or the apps.
We may collect and process the following personal information:Users are under no obligation to provide any particular information. However, if a user should choose to withhold requested information, we may not be able to provide that user with certain services.
We may also automatically collect the following technical information to help us to provide the services to you:Information we receive from other sources:This is information we receive about you if you use any other services we provide or information that we receive from authorised third parties; in which case you will have been informed when your data was collected that it may be shared with us for a specific purpose.
Uses made of personal informationInformation relating to a given pupil will only be accessible to the relevant school and teacher(s) and to the parents of that pupil (provided the parents have registered with us first). We will not share information relating to a pupil with anyone other than the school, the teacher(s) at that school and the parents of that pupil who have registered with us.
We will never sell your personal data to a third party.
We will only use the personal information that we are provided with to:Users will only be contacted with information regarding the products and services of third parties if they consented to such contact at the point their information is or was collected.
If a user does not wish us to continue to use their information in this way, they may unsubscribe at any time by following the instructions contained in any communication(s) sent to them. A user can also exercise this right at any time by using the contacting us details at the end of this Policy.
Schools and teachers who have registered with us will have the facility to generate reports of the usage of the app made by parents so that, for example, they can see when and to what extent parents have accessed information relating to their child via the app – they will not have access to parents’ account details.
Schools may also have the facility to generate reports on the use of the website and the app by teachers.
Non-personally identifiable informationWhen a user visits the website or accesses or uses any app, we may automatically collect and aggregate additional anonymous information such as your browser type and version, browser plug-in types and versions, operating system and platform and time zone settings, to assist us in providing a more effective and reliable service on the website or app.
Cookies and similar technologyThe website and apps also use cookies or similar technology to collect information about users’ access to the website or access or use of any app.
Cookies are pieces of information that include a unique reference code that a website transfers to a user’s device to store and sometimes track information about that user. A number of cookies we use last only for the duration of the relevant web session and expire when the user closes their browser. Other cookies are used to remember a user when they return to the website and will last for longer.
We use cookies to:Some of the cookies used on our website are set by us and some are set by third parties who are delivering services on our behalf.
Most computer and some mobile web browsers automatically accept cookies but, if you prefer, you can change your browser to prevent that or to notify you each time a cookie is set. You can also learn more about cookies by visiting www.allaboutcookies.org which includes additional useful information about cookies and how to block cookies using different types of browser. Please note however, that by blocking or deleting cookies you may not be able to take full advantage of the website or apps (as the case may be).
a) Our cookiesInformation sharingWe may disclose aggregate statistics about visitors to the website and users of the apps in order to describe our services to prospective partners but these statistics will include no personally identifiable information.
We will only disclose users’ personal information to those affiliates, agents or contractors who assist us in providing the services we offer through the website or the app, processing transactions, fulfilling requests for information, receiving and sending communications, analysing data, providing support services or in other tasks from time to time, and as already set out in this Policy. Our affiliates, agents and contractors warrant that they will only use your information to the extent necessary to perform their defined functions and on terms no less stringent than this Policy and our data protection terms.
In the event that we undergo re-organisation or the business, or key assets, are sold to a third party, you agree that any personal information we hold about you may be transferred to that re-organised entity or third party.
We may disclose your personal information if legally entitled or required to do so (for example if required by law or by a Court order or if we believe that such action is necessary to prevent fraud or cybercrime or to protect the website or the rights, property or personal safety of any person).
Public forumsThe website may, from time to time, make chat rooms, message boards, news groups and/or other public forums available to its users. Any content, contributions or information that is disclosed in these areas becomes public information and you should exercise caution when using these and never disclose your personal information.
We reserve the right to take down any contributions or information we believe to be in appropriate for our website or apps or which we believe conflict with our Terms of Use.
Child safetyProtecting the safety of children when they use the internet is extremely important to us. We recommend that pupils receive permission from their teacher, parent or guardian before gaining access to any website or app or sending personal information to anyone else. A pupil’s access to our website or apps must only ever be in accordance with this privacy policy, the School Terms and Conditions or User Terms;External linksThe website and apps may, from time to time, contain links to external sites. We are not responsible for the privacy policies or the content of such sites.
Payment processingAny payment details you provide will be encrypted using secure sockets layer (SSL) technology before they are submitted to us over the internet. Payments may be made on the website or app are made through a payment solutions provider (in which case you will be notified who this is). You may be providing credit or debit card information directly to a payment solutions provider, so information which you supply to the payment provider will not be within our control and will subject to the payment provider’s own privacy policy and terms and conditions.
SecurityWe place great importance on the security of all personally identifiable information associated with users, pupils, teachers and schools. We have security measures in place to attempt to protect against the loss, misuse and alteration of personal information under our control. For example, our security, terms and policies are periodically reviewed and enhanced as necessary and only authorised personnel have access to personal information. Whilst we cannot ensure or guarantee that loss, misuse or alteration of information will never occur, we use all reasonable efforts to prevent it.
You should bear in mind that submission of information over the internet is never entirely secure. We cannot guarantee the security of information you submit via the website whilst it is in transit over the internet and any such submission is at your own risk.
It is advisable to close your browser or app when you have finished your user session to help ensure others do not access your personal information if you use a shared computer or device or a computer or device in a public place.
Storage of informationInformation that you submit via the website or app is sent to and stored on secure servers located in the United Kingdom.
Your rightsYou have the right to ask us not to process your personal data for marketing purposes. We will always aim to inform you (before collecting your data) if we intend to use your data for such purposes or if we intend to disclose your information to any third party for such purposes.
You can exercise your right to prevent such processing by amending your account preferences or by unsubscribing, at any time, from any email or other communication you receive from us.
Anyone in relation to whom we collect, process or store personal information (including pupils) also has a legal right:You can exercise these legal rights, at any time, by contacting us in the ways set out below.
Contacting usPlease submit any questions, concerns or comments you have about this Policy or any requests concerning your personal data by email tocontact@marvellousme.comor via theGet In Touchpage on our website.
We are MarvellousMe Ltd, a company registered in England under number 08782237, and our registered address is at Mousetows, Mouse Lane, Steyning, West Sussex BN44 3LP, UK.
Quick Links:HomeSchool LeadersParentsKitbagHelp CentreGet In TouchSchool DemoWhere to go:Our MissionTerms of UsePrivacy PolicyGDPR Compliance© 2022 MarvellousMe.
All Rights Reserved.
All trademarks, logos and brand names are the property of their respective owners. Use of these names, trademarks and brands does not imply endorsement.
Illustrations by Lucy Corrina.
