old id = 103
Uncovering the unexpected link between opioid use and memory loss | MIT Technology Review
2018
https://www.technologyreview.com/2022/04/27/1048566/uncovering-the-unexpected-link-between-opioid-use-and-memory-loss

Uncovering the unexpected link between opioid use and memory lossLauren Aguirre ’86Memory contextualizes our emotions and deepens our identities. But illnesses such as dementia can wipe out decades of experiences without a trace.
In her debut book,The Memory Thief, science journalist Lauren Aguirre ’86 explores how opioids can contribute to this loss. The book chronicles an unusual form of amnesia initially identified in a group of fentanyl overdose survivors—and explores how this discovery might lead to a cure for Alzheimer’s.
Aguirre studied science journalism at MIT and landed a position withNova, the science documentary series from PBS, through her participation in the Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program (UROP). After working there throughout her senior year, she accepted a full-time production role after graduation, exploring topics from space exploration to human origins.
Eventually, though, she wanted to explore a single topic more deeply. The one she chose was intensely personal: she temporarily lost her own memory during a simple partial seizure, a condition associated with epilepsy. “It was very quickly treated with medicine, but I had that really visceral experience of how terrifying it is to really not know who you are for a couple of minutes. It launched my fascination with ‘strange brains,’” she says.
This led her to study fentanyl-induced amnesia, documented in a 2018 report in the New England Journal of Medicine and observed in a cluster of Massachusetts patients. In some people, fentanyl kills neurons in the hippocampus—a brain area already vulnerable to the oxygen deprivation that occurs during an overdose—by causing cells to fire out of control.
Because the syndrome is so rare, she encountered some doctors who were skeptical about the connection between fentanyl and amnesia. The book traces how others such as Jed Barash, medical director of the Soldiers’ Home in Chelsea, Massachusetts, doggedly pursued answers, ultimately confirming how opioids can damage the hippocampus.
“These Alzheimer’s researchers and neuroscientists are heroes. We owe them a debt of gratitude, because I do think that eventually there will be, if not cures, at least treatments,” she says.
Currently working on a book of medical fiction, Aguirre credits MIT with her willingness to take those leaps. “Just being able to survive there gave me the confidence to believe that eventually, if you work hard enough, you’ll figure things out,” she says.
byKara BaskinShareThis story was part of our May/June 2022 issue.
PopularKeep ReadingMost PopularWhy China is still obsessed with disinfecting everythingMost public health bodies dealing with covid have long since moved on from the idea of surface transmission. China’s didn’t—and that helps it control the narrative about the disease’s origins and danger.
These materials were meant to revolutionize the solar industry. Why hasn’t it happened?Perovskites are promising, but real-world conditions have held them back.
Anti-aging drugs are being tested as a way to treat covidDrugs that rejuvenate our immune systems and make us biologically younger could help protect us from the disease’s worst effects.
A quick guide to the most important AI law you’ve never heard ofThe European Union is planning new legislation aimed at curbing the worst harms associated with artificial intelligence.
Stay connectedGet the latest updates fromMIT Technology ReviewDiscover special offers, top stories, upcoming events, and more.
Thank you for submitting your email!It looks like something went wrong.
We’re having trouble saving your preferences. Try refreshing this page and updating them one more time. If you continue to get this message, reach out to us atcustomer-service@technologyreview.comwith a list of newsletters you’d like to receive.
MIT Technology ReviewOur in-depth reporting reveals what’s going on now to prepare you for what’s coming next.
Subscribeto support our journalism.
AboutHelp© 2022 MIT Technology Review
