old id = 1196
You and AI – The future of work | Royal Society
2018
https://royalsociety.org/science-events-and-lectures/2018/09/you-and-ai

You currently have JavaScript disabled in your web browser, please enable JavaScript to view our website as intended.
Here are the instructions of how to enable JavaScript in your browser.
You and AI – The future of workJoin Professor Joseph E. Stiglitz, Nobel Laureate in economics and professor at Columbia University, to discuss how AI might affect work and working life, and how its benefits might be shared (or not) across society.
Event HighlightsWatch the VideoJoin Professor Joseph E. Stiglitz, Nobel laureate in economics and professor at Columbia University, to discuss how AI might affect work and working life, and how its benefits might be shared across society.
OverviewJoin Professor Joseph E. Stiglitz, Nobel Laureate in economics and professor at Columbia University, to discuss how AI might affect work and working life, and how its benefits might be shared (or not) across society.
AI already supports many of the products and services we interact with on a daily basis, and technological advances are creating systems that can perform increasingly sophisticated tasks. Alongside these advances, come questions about the impact of AI on work and working life, and its implications for society. Will AI systems replace people in the workplace? How might these technologies affect how, where, and why we work? And how might this influence social inequalities?In the fifth discussion of the You and AI series, Professor Joseph E. Stiglitz will explore the implications of AI for your work and inequality, considering how we can share the benefits of these technologies across society. Professor Diane Coyle CBE, celebrated economist and professor of Public Policy at the University of Cambridge, will share her thoughts before joining Professor Stiglitz for what promises to be a lively question and answer discussion.
This is an unparalleled opportunity for you to contribute to the conversation about this technology and the way it is becoming ingrained in every part of our lives.
Please note: this is event is offered on a first-come, first-served basis. We recommend arriving early as we anticipate it to be very popular and can not guarantee admission.
The You and AI series will culminate in two finale events in late 2018 in Manchester and London where Professor Jim Al-Khalili OBE FRS and Professor Brian Cox OBE FRS respectively will lead a public debate about these topics and issues. The events will be held on the 28 October 2018 (Manchester) and 11 December 2018 (London) and tickets will go on sale shortly. More details to follow.
For all enquiries, please contact theEvents Team.
Attending the eventThe Royal Society’s aim is to make its events accessible to as many people as possible. This is why our events are free and offered on a first-come, first-served basis.
Related EventsYou and AI at the Manchester Science FestivalSunday 28 October 2018Throughout 2018, we've brought you the world's leading thinkers on Artificial Intelligence.
You and AI – the history, capabilities and frontiers of AIMonday 30 April 2018Join Demis Hassabis, world-renowned British neuroscientist, artificial intelligence (AI) researcher and the co-founder and CEO of DeepMind, to explore groundbreaking research driving the application of AI to scientific discovery. This lecture will explore the history, capabilities and scientific frontiers of AI.
You and AI – AI ApplicationsThursday 03 May 2018Join Marcus Du Sautoy, mathematician, author, and science communicator, as he speaks to leading artificial intelligence experts for a discussion and open forum on AI's applications.
You and AIYou and AI – The emerging theory of algorithmic fairness: the challenges to making machines play fairMonday 11 June 2018Join Cynthia Dwork, Gordon McKay Professor of Computer Science at the Harvard Paulson School of Engineering, Radcliffe Alumnae Professor at the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study, and Affiliated Faculty at Harvard Law School, as she explores the challenges to making machines play fair.
You and AIYou and AI – Machine learning, bias and implications for inequalityTuesday 17 July 2018Join Kate Crawford, Distinguished Research Professor at New York University, a Principal Researcher at Microsoft Research New York, and the co-founder and co-director the AI Now Institute, as she discusses the biases built into machine learning, and what that means for the social implications of AI.
You and AI at the Manchester Science FestivalSunday 28 October 2018Throughout 2018, we've brought you the world's leading thinkers on Artificial Intelligence.
Subscribe today to keep in touchSubscribe to our newsletters to be updated with all of our latest news on innovation, events and articles
