old id = 800
Online Casinos Canada✔️ The Top 100 Canadian Online Casinos 2022
2000
https://www.onlinecasinos.net

Online Casinos in Canada 2022Serious Reviews of Top Canadian Online Casinos For Real Money GamblingWelcome to our detailed reviews, guides & rankings of the top Canadian online casinos in 2022. We ONLY list trusted & fully licensed casino sites by The Canadian Kahnawake Gaming Commission, MGA Gaming Authority, United Kingdom Gambling Commission(UKGC) or The Alcohol and Gaming Commission of Ontario (AGCO).
We have been playing and testing gaming sites since 2001, and all the gambling sites we list and review are safe, private, and secure using 128-bit or higher encryption, so you are protected when playing for real money in Canada.
18+ ONLYOnline Casino Gambling can be addictive, pleaseplay responsibly.
Compare The Best 100 Canadian Online Casinos May 2022:Jackpot City Online Casino Review 2022Jackpot City rated as #1 on OnlineCasinos.net, Canadian Kahnawake gaming licensee, over 3,5 million members since 1998. Exclusive Bonus, one of the world’s ...
Vegas Paradise Casino Review – #2 Top Online CasinoVegas Paradise is definitely one of the best gambling sites in 2022, with a vast selection of games from many different gaming providersLucky Nugget Casino ReviewLucky Nugget rated as #3, and one of my favorite online casinos, I been a regular player here since 2002, and only have positive things to say about Lucky ...
Jackpot Paradise ReviewJackpot Paradise is a popular site with one of the most extensive collections of slots. progressive jackpot and live dealer gamesLeoVegas Casino ReviewLeoVegas offers a massive selection of games. Leo Vegas was awarded 'Online Casino of the Year' at the Global Gaming Awards, one of the world's most trusted ...
River Belle ReviewRiver Belle casino is a southern riverboat themed online casino. The Riverbelle casino uses Microgaming software, which allows it to offer an extensive line of ...
Spin Casino ReviewSpin Casino is also one of the top 10 in Canada and has a rating of 9 out of 10 and, for sure, one of the world's best online casinos.
Casino.com ReviewCasino.com Review - Exclusive 100% Bonus up to $1200 Casino.com is a well-known name among experienced players and the online gambling industry. If you’re a ...
PlayOjo Casino ReviewPlayOjo Casino is a five-year-old casino with 2000 games. We praise the no wagering requirements on the free spins and rewards.
Dunder Casino ReviewDunder is one of the biggest white label casinos on GIG platform and treats players exceptionally well by offering daily bonuses.
Luxury Casino ReviewLuxury Casino has been taking Canadian players since 2001, and they have an excellent reputation in the gaming industry.
Casino Action ReviewCheck our review of Casino Action - part of Casino Rewards Group. We cover games, bonuses, payment methods and also offer a video preview.
Gaming Club ReviewGaming Club was the world's first online casino to launch back in 1994, and now after nearly 30 years still going strong.
Royal Vegas Casino ReviewRoyal Vegas casino is one of the world's top 20 online casinos, read our review, and see why we list it as the fourteen best online casino.
888 Casino Review888 casino was one of the first online casinos, the casino has a $88 no deposit casino bonusCasumo Casino ReviewCasumo casino has a record amount of games over 1590. They also have a unique loyalty program, and one of the best I have tried. Casumo is a regular winner of ...
Fun Casino ReviewFun Casino offers a 10% cashback on all your lost money bets, and the game catalogue includes over 1000 real money slotsGolden Tiger ReviewGolden Tiger casino is a popular online casino for Canadian's they offer an excellent $1500 welcome bonus to all new players.
New Canadian Casino Sites:WOW Casino ReviewWOW is a premier cryptocurrency online casino that was established in 2021. The gaming site is already very popular. ...
Slotnite Casino ReviewSlotnite Casino, we have ranked as #17. They offer 2000 games that use the latest HTML5 technologySpinAway ReviewSpinAway offers 1692 quality games, including live dealers and some of the best slot machines in Canada.
Party Casino ReviewPartyCasino rated as #28. I have been playing here 2-3 times a year since 2006 when they opened. It's a good gaming ...
See More Online Casinos HereHelp Choosing Good Online Casinos in CanadaThe good thing about only playing at trusted licensed real money sites in Canada is that the game’s payout percentages are all reviewed by the Gaming Commissions, and they also make sure that you get paid if you win and that the sites are safe and secure.
Furthermore, you can also play using Canadian dollars on nearly all sites we list.
Feel free to use OnlineCasinos.net ratings & reviews to find the safe gaming sites that suit your gambling needs best.
In this section, we will explain in depth some of the most important aspects of choosing a real money Canadian online casino site to play at.
This, of course, extends to European and UK players also because many of the online casinos available to Canadian players are also available to players in Europe and UK, but you will need to check because some European countries such as Spain and Italy also need local licensing.
About Online Casinos 2022Serious Reviews, Guide and AdviceWhat are Online Casinos?Online Casinos are real money gambling sites that run on the internet, and use specialized gambling software. The most popular gaming software are developed by Netent, Microgaming, Elk Studios, and Play’NGO. One of the best advantages of playing on the internet, are that gambling sites use software and therefore you do not have to pay tips to the croupier as you would do on Canadian land-based casinos. Another advantage is that on many games like slots the payout percentage is higher compared to land based casinos, and that can make a big difference in how much you win or lose in the long run.
The best Canadian gaming sites have a bigselection of the best real money slot machines, and huge slots jackpots with some of the biggest jackpots going up to 10 Million dollars, and they of cause also have blackjack, video poker, roulette and other poker games.
You will also find that the best Canadian online gambling sites have hundreds of exciting bonus slots games like the popularDivine Fortune, Book of Dead, Guns N Roses, Money Train 2. My personal 2022 favorite is the Ancient Fortunes: Zeus 9 masks of fire slot machine that can be played at VegasParadise.com, these slot machines are all multi-line slots with several exciting bonus games.
Another good thing is when you play from Canada, the casinos will often offer you a free welcome bonus on your first deposit. Some will have a 100% match bonus, so if you deposit $100, you will get an extra $100 free bonus to play with.
You can see the different bonuses in the above chartHERE.
There are thousands of casinos on the internet, and some are good, and unfortunately, some are bad, so we have made the chart with the most popular and trusted ones, and we have also listed the sites that players and OnlineCasinos.net have voted the best Canadian 2022.
Always read the T&C and the wagering requirements before accepting a bonus.
Security at Canadian Online CasinosAll of the online casinos we review and recommend are licensedand have passed our security and safety tests. This is paramount to making sure you play at a gambling site that you can trust.
As mentioned above, you should, as a Canadian player, always check to see that the casino site you are thinking about playing real money at is covered by one of these licensees: Canada The Kahnawake Gaming Commission, EU The Malta Lotteries and Gaming Authority, United Kingdom Gambling License (UKGC), Gibraltar Gambling authority . These licenses are trusted and have so many advantages that work in favour of players.
Most Trusted & Officially Gaming Licensees For Players in Canada :Here are some good reasons why it is important to only play at Canadian online casinos with good licensees like the ones above. There is a formal UK government act to make sure online businesses pass 10 cybersecurity tests. It means that the casino must make sure it has security policies in place to protect the company and the members of the casinos. Employees and members are taught and informed how to act responsibly when playing for money online. This also means that Canadian casinos with a UK licensee must have state-of-the-art security systems.
With a Canadian casino site licensed by the UKGC, you have a guarantee that your money is safe. 128 Bit financial grade encryption secures all transactions. Plus, players account balances must be kept in a separate holding account from the casinos own operating accounts.
That means should anything happen to the casino, players are 100% guaranteed to recover all their cash.
Another important rule that the UKGC forces online casinos with a UKGC license is to allow for third-party external testing of their LIVE Dealer Suites as well as Random Number Generators (RNGs). The RNGs are an algorithm that mimics the results of real-life dealers on virtual casino games. They are amazingly accurate, but they also need to undergo stringent testing for both algorithm code worthiness as well as security.
Lastly, before any casino can get a license with the UKGC, it needs to show that it is serious about responsible gambling. This means they need to advertise places that help players with gambling addiction by providing links to Gamble Aware and GamCare sites, which can help people who may or potentially have a gambling problem. On top of this, the online casinos must provide software that allows players to restrict their deposits and ban themselves from playing so they can cool off.
The UKGC is governed by the British Government. This means that UK consumer laws are forced upon any Canadian gambling site that wants to operate in the UK under a UKGC license. This is great news for players because should there ever be a dispute with an online casino, then the UKGC will act on the players behalf as firstly a mediator, and if the gambling site is found to be guilty of breaking UK consumer rules, then the casino will be fined or even suspended and the player compensated.
Other licensing authoritiesIf you are playing from other places in the world, then there are other good licensing authorities that regulate online casinos. HM Government of Gibraltar Gambling authority is also a well-known licensing authorityThe Online Casino Games For CanadiansMuch of the time, many players will finally choose their online casino based on the games available.
Some Canadian players prefer a mix of software providers at their online casino so they can have a diverse gaming experience, especially when it comes to slots. There are also those that like to stick to their favourite software provider because they like a particular designers perspective if how slots or table games should be played.
Game designers or casino software providers makes the games. They then rent the games out to the online casinos so that they can offer them to their players.
The sites we list uses the most prominent software providers:Many casino software providers will also have games from other software developers or they will only feature their own games. You read see more about thesoftware providers here.
If you are purely a Blackjack player, then you will want to find a Canadian casino with the widest variety and variation of Blackjack tables, which is usually Microgaming.
For Baccarat and Roulette players the same is true. The choice is usually down to preference. Roulette, Blackjack or Baccarat players are not worried about a huge slots selection. On the other hand, a slots player will want to ensure that he or she has a variety of games available.
Every Canadian online casino site we cover, we give you a list of games available:Many of these games will come with different variants. We also cover as many of the different variants of each game as we can.
For example a game variety of games including these:As you can see, an online casino can mention it has Blackjack, but you should also check on the variants of Blackjack available. To make sure you get a good variety of games at the online casino you want to play at, check out their gaming section or one of our casino reviews that covers most the games available.
When it comes toLIVE Casinos, you will be looking for much of the same aspects covered in section c)The variety of games available is important. There are also plenty of other aspects of a LIVE Dealer Suite that you should consider, which we always cover in our LIVE Dealer Casino reviews.
Here are some more things to consider if you want to play LIVE dealer games:One of the most important points for many Live Dealer players is the number of dealers and tables that are available. There is nothing worse than having to wait in a queue to play. In today’s competitive online LIVE Dealer Suite industry, no one wants to wait to play.
If you are considering a Canadian LIVE Dealer Casino, make sure that they have plenty of tables and dealers always opening. You can see if an online casino has enough resources to meet peak demand by looking at the naming convention of their tables games. For instance:You can instantly tell from this naming convention that there are plenty of Blackjack tables always opening to meet demand. You can also look for features such as ‘Bet Behind’ provided by Evolution Gaming. This applies to Blackjack tables that are already full.
Instead of sitting at one of the positions on the Blackjack table, you can bet behind the seated players. This stops the tables from getting full and means there is always a game of Blackjack available. Roulette tables don’t really suffer from this problem because they can accommodate multiple players.
Devices You Can Play The Games On in CanadaLucky today many new online casino games are designed with mobile gaming in mind. You should always make sure that your online casino offers support for all your devices.
Consider 2 vital points first:Nearly all modern online casinos today have an HTML5 site, which means you can log on and play mobile casino games from a web browser with most devices with no download needed. However, some online casinos will require you to use an app to play on your mobile device. If you, however, are playing on your laptop/desktop, some casinos in Canada give you the option to download an app or use your browser to play the games. In addition, the download version for laptops often has a more extensive selection of games.
So today, many of the best online casinos in Canada offer all the options above so you can play mobile casinos with an app or web browser depending on your own personal preference. This means there is one feature left to check:Make sure that you online casino supports your device:Our casino reviews will always cover in detail every operating system, devices supported, whether the casino offers downloads or browser play and from which devices each option is available!Canadian Casino Bonuses and VIP ProgramsOf course, the next aspect to look out for is the casino bonuses an online casino offers you. We make sure we cover everything you need to consider when choosing which bonuses offers you the best incentives to play and rewards you the most for your loyalty.
Welcome Bonuses usually come in several forms. Mostly this requires you to make your first deposit, and you will get a percentage of your deposit on top, known as a deposit match. Some online casinos will reward you instantly even without a deposit by giving you free spins, free cash, or free credits just for signing up. Some offer these free spins and credits along with your first deposit.
Welcome Bonuses:It is a good ideas to make sure that you identify whether your online casino offers decent regular bonuses after you take advantage of the original sign-up and/or Welcome Bonuses.
There is little sense in getting a big Welcome Bonus and then never reaping the benefits of a regular bonus program as well as a VIP program that rewards you for your loyalty. The idea is to create longevity and Welcome Bonuses with scarce loyalty awards do not help you do this.
In every casino review we provide, we cover in great detail all bonus offers available to you.
The fourth important factor to consider when choosing a site to play at is making sure you can get in contact with the support team whenever you need it. That means getting in contact quickly, not having to send an email and wait hours for a reply and repeat this process for several days before the problem has been resolved.
Once again, before we list any sites here, we run several scenarios and tests by contacting customers services. We test their speediness, responses, availability (waiting times), and we make sure that they ask the right security questions when we make requests for support and information.
So How is OnlineCasinos.net Different from the Rest?We like to see ourselves as experts in the online gambling industry simply because our team has been reviewing & testing online casinos since 2001. We love to play and have been playing real money games since 1998. The first online casino, Gaming Club, was released in 1994, so we have nearly been here from the beginning.
There are few online casino teams that can boast this much experience. We truly believe that we are all-rounders when it comes to covering every corner of the online gambling industry.
Our focus is not just on the online casinos themselves, but also the entire package that comes with being an Canadian player.
As you have read, we cover everything:Every aspect of testing is covered by our goal, which helps us to fulfill our mission. Without these structures in place, we would not be able to provide such authentic and detailed reviews.
Our GoalOur goal is not only to be different but to make sure that you are provided with honest and accurate information leaving no stone unturned when it comes to answering any question you may have about playing at an online casino. Without our honest and detailed reviews, we would just be regular gambling review website, which is not our mission.
Our MissionTo be honest and helpful, in the reviews we provide so we can help players, new or experienced, make the right decisions when it comes to choosing a high-quality online casino that suits their playing style and personal situation.
We Leave Nothing Out!As you can see, we cover every aspect of an online casino experience that you could possibly come across. We do this using expert testing from a team of casino gurus that know the industry inside out. If you are looking for reassurance, then you have come to the right place because we take our reputation seriously!If you do feel we have missed anything, then we would love to hear from you. Please contact us and give us your feedback and we will act on it.
Responsible Gambling Help sites in CanadaThe Blacklisted CasinosUnfortunately, not all online casinos are safe to play at, and there are some betting sites on the internet that even don’t have licenses or don’t pay the players when they win or treat their customers poorly.
So we have been updating our list with blacklisted/rogue sites, so you know which ones to keep away from:Here are some of the latest Blacklisted sites:African Palace Casinowe haveblacklisteddue to many players reporting confiscation of winnings, holding back winnings, considerable delays in payments, etc. We doNOTrecommend playing here Avoid at all costs!99 Slot Machinesisblacklisted– many players are complaining of not getting paid at all and very poor customer support. Avoid at all costs!See more blacklisted sitesCANADIAN ONLINE CASINOS FAQsDo you have questions about playing at real money online casinos in Canada? Maybe you want to know if you can play on your mobile? Or you would like to know how to deposit money into your casino account?Online casinos can be confusing for beginners as well as those that already play. Sometimes not all facts are there on the FAQ sections or it has masses of content making it difficult to sift through all the questions and answers as well as other information the casino has to offer.
In this online casino ‘FAQs’ guide we will cover some of the most common questions most newbies and regular Canadian players ask us.
We will cover several common areas when it comes to online casino play:Signing Up for An Online Casino in CanadaAn online casino’s main objective is to get you to sign up at the very least. This is regardless of making a deposit. As such, it is extremely easy to sign up for an account without having to submit to much information.
You could be online and playing games in a matter of minutes.
1. What do I need to become an online casino member?Initially, all you will need is an email address and to set a password. You will also need to confirm your age and some cases your address depending on which country you are playing from.
2. What is the best Canadian online casino??3. Do I have to deposit to play the games?4. How old do I need to be to play for real money?5. Do I have to sign up via my desktop or mobile?Making Your First Deposit and What Payment Methods Can You UseOnline casinos make it very easy to deposit money. If they didn’t, then the idea of an online casino would immediately be defeated. What is the use of an gaming site that you cannot deposit to?Due to this fact, casino sites have very clear deposit FAQ sections that you can refer to.
1. Do I need to send ID to make a deposit?Usually, most sites will require you to send a government form of ID and proof of address. This is a requirement to make sure that all players are over 19 in Canada, and 18+ in UK as per the laws of their licencing issuer, which will be the UK Gambling Commission (UKGC). This also protects you in case of fraudulent activities financially. Once you have provided the casino with this information, you can start playing for real money.
2. Which currencies can I deposit in?3. Can I deposit using my cryptocurrencies?4. Can I deposit using my e-wallet?5. Can I deposit using a credit card or debit card?6. I don’t have a credit or debit card. How can I make a deposit?Making WithdrawalsAn online casino would be useless if it did not give you plenty of ways to withdraw your cash. The only point we would like you to be aware of is thatnot all deposit methods can be used as withdrawal1. How do I withdraw my cash?As you will have already provided ID to play real money games as per the law, you will easily be able to withdraw your cash. Just go to the cashier section, click on withdraw, select where you want to withdraw your money to, and the withdrawal will be processed. Easy as 123!2. What does ‘pending or processing time’ mean when making a withdrawal?3. Are all withdrawals methods instant?E-wallets are usually instant and come with no pending time. This is because the cash will go to an e-wallet where you can dispute any withdrawals there if you wish to. Here is a general list of what to expect from most online casinos in terms of withdrawals.
Bonus Codes, Loyalty Points, and VIP RewardsCasino bonus codes are a great way to begin your online casino experience and to continue playing by adding extra cash and other benefits to your casino play. Do you due diligence and search for regular bonus codes, promotions, VIP rewards, Loyalty points, and welcome bonuses.
1. What is a welcome bonus?This is your chance to get deposit match on your first deposit made with the casino. Some online casinos offer 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th deposit matches. They will also throw in free spins on slots or free chips to play on table games.
2. What are no deposit bonus codes?3. What are regular bonuses or promotions?4. What are loyalty or Reward points?5. What are VIP Rewards?6. What is a playthrough amount?Games and Betting RequirementThe best asset an online casino has is its gaming list. Having a decent list of games is going to be one of the deciding factors for any player.
You can check the gaming section on the homepage of most Canadian online casinos or check one of our reviews if the homepage does not have a list of games.
1. What type of games do Canadian online casinos offer?Most Canadian online casinos nowadays offer over 600 games to play. Slots, Blackjack, Roulette, and poker games where you pitch your skills and strategies versus the house are the most popular. Other games include baccarat, craps, keno, instant win scratch cards, featured games, lottery games and more.
2. Do online casinos offer variations of each game?3. Are the gaming lists the same for mobile and desktop play?4. What are LIVE dealer suites?5. What are the betting requirements and limits?6. What are the payout percentages for each game?7. What are progressive jackpots?8. How many gaming developers contribute to each online casino?Software, Safety, Privacy and Technology1. Who are the different casino platform providers?Today most online casinos are an operator connected to a casino platform. The platform is owned by companies such as Playtech, Microgaming, and NetEntertainment for virtual casino platforms. For LIVE dealer suites, Playtech, Evolution Gaming, Microgaming, and Extreme Live Gaming LIVE Dealers. These companies provide the technology to connect via any device as well as to manage casino loyalty rewards.
2. What are Random Number Generators (RNG)?3. How do I know my personal details are safe?4. How do I know the games gives fair results?5. How do I know my connection to the online casino is safe?OnlineCasinos.Net helps you find the best safe licensed online casinos. You can read more here about us and the site here:So How is OnlineCasinos.net Different from the Rest?.
PLAYERS ARE IN SAFE HANDSAll our top casinos are verified & audited by the likes of:
