old id = 150
History - Wikipedia
1240
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History

HistoryThose who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it.
[1]—George SantayanaHistory(fromAncient Greek:ἱστορία,romanized:historíā,lit.
'inquiry; knowledge acquired by investigation')[2]is the study and the documentation of thepast.
[3][4]Events before theinvention of writing systemsare consideredprehistory. "History" is anumbrella termcomprising past events as well as the memory, discovery, collection, organization, presentation, and interpretation of these events.
Historiansseek knowledge of the past usinghistorical sourcessuch as written documents, oral accounts, art and material artifacts, and ecological markers.
[5]History is also anacademic disciplinewhich usesnarrativeto describe, examine, question, and analyze past events, and investigate their patterns of cause and effect.
[6][7]Historians often debate which narrative best explains an event, as well as the significance of different causes and effects. Historians also debate thenature of historyas an end in itself, as well as its usefulness to give perspective on the problems of the present.
[6][8][9][10]Stories common to a particular culture, but not supported by external sources (such as the tales surroundingKing Arthur), are usually classified ascultural heritageorlegends.
[11][12]History differs frommythin that it is supported by verifiableevidence. However, ancient cultural influences have helped spawn variant interpretations of the nature of history which have evolved over the centuries and continue to change today. The modern study of history is wide-ranging, and includes the study of specific regions and the study of certain topical or thematic elements of historical investigation. History is often taught as a part of primary and secondary education, and the academic study of history is amajor disciplinein university studies.
Herodotus, a 5th-century BCGreek historian, is often considered the "father of history" in the Western tradition,[13]although he has also been criticized as the "father of lies".
[14][15]Along with his contemporaryThucydides, he helped form the foundations for the modern study of past events and societies.
[16]Their works continue to be read today, and the gap between the culture-focused Herodotus and the military-focused Thucydides remains a point of contention or approach in modern historical writing. In East Asia, a statechronicle, theSpring and Autumn Annals, was reputed to date from as early as 722 BC, although only 2nd-century BC texts have survived.
ContentsEtymologyThe wordhistorycomes fromhistoría(Ancient Greek:ἱστορία,romanized:historíā,lit.
'inquiry, knowledge from inquiry, or judge'[17]). It was in that sense thatAristotleused the word in hisHistory of Animals.
[18]The ancestor wordἵστωρis attested early on inHomeric Hymns,Heraclitus, theAthenianephebes' oath, and inBoeoticinscriptions (in a legal sense, either "judge" or "witness", or similar). The Greek word was borrowed into Classical Latin ashistoria, meaning "investigation, inquiry, research, account, description, written account of past events, writing of history, historical narrative, recorded knowledge of past events, story, narrative".
Historywas borrowed from Latin (possibly viaOld IrishorOld Welsh) intoOld Englishasstær("history, narrative, story"), but this word fell out of use in the late Old English period.
[19]Meanwhile, as Latin becameOld French(andAnglo-Norman),historiadeveloped into forms such asistorie,estoire, andhistorie, with new developments in the meaning: "account of the events of a person's life (beginning of the 12th century), chronicle, account of events as relevant to a group of people or people in general (1155), dramatic or pictorial representation of historical events (c.
1240), body of knowledge relative to human evolution, science (c.
1265), narrative of real or imaginary events, story (c.
1462)".
[19]It was from Anglo-Norman thathistorywas borrowed intoMiddle English, and this time the loan stuck. It appears in the 13th-centuryAncrene Wisse, but seems to have become a common word in the late 14th century, with an early attestation appearing inJohn Gower'sConfessio Amantisof the 1390s (VI.1383): "I finde in a bok compiled | To this matiere an old histoire, | The which comth nou to mi memoire". InMiddle English, the meaning ofhistorywas "story" in general. The restriction to the meaning "the branch of knowledge that deals with past events; the formal record or study of past events, esp. human affairs" arose in the mid-15th century.
[19]With theRenaissance, older senses of the word were revived, and it was in the Greek sense thatFrancis Baconused the term in the late 16th century, when he wrote aboutnatural history. For him,historiawas "the knowledge of objects determined by space and time", that sort of knowledge provided bymemory(whilesciencewas provided byreason, andpoetrywas provided byfantasy).
[20]In an expression of the linguisticsynthetic vs. analytic/isolating dichotomy, English like Chinese (史 vs. 诌) now designates separate words for human history andstorytellingin general. In modernGerman,French, and most Germanic andRomance languages, which are solidly synthetic and highly inflected, the same word is still used to mean both "history" and "story".
Historianin the sense of a "researcher of history" is attested from 1531. In allEuropean languages, the substantivehistoryis still used to mean both "what happened with men", and "the scholarly study of the happened", the latter sense sometimes distinguished with a capital letter, or the wordhistoriography.
[18]The adjectivehistoricalis attested from 1661, andhistoricfrom 1669.
[21]DescriptionHistorians write in the context of their own time, and with due regard to the current dominant ideas of how to interpret the past, and sometimes write to provide lessons for their own society. In the words ofBenedetto Croce, "All history is contemporary history". History is facilitated by the formation of a "true discourse of past" through the production of narrative and analysis of past events relating to the human race.
[22]The modern discipline of history is dedicated to the institutional production of this discourse.
All events that are remembered and preserved in some authentic form constitute the historical record.
[23]The task of historical discourse is to identify the sources which can most usefully contribute to the production of accurate accounts of past. Therefore, the constitution of the historian's archive is a result of circumscribing a more general archive by invalidating the usage of certain texts and documents (by falsifying their claims to represent the "true past"). Part of the historian's role is to skillfully and objectively utilize the vast amount of sources from the past, most often found in the archives. The process of creating a narrative inevitably generates a silence as historians remember or emphasize different events of the past.
[24][clarification needed]The study of history has sometimes been classified as part of thehumanitiesand at other times as part of thesocial sciences.
[25]It can also be seen as a bridge between those two broad areas, incorporating methodologies from both. Some individual historians strongly support one or the other classification.
[26]In the 20th century, FrenchhistorianFernand Braudelrevolutionized the study of history, by using such outside disciplines aseconomics,anthropology, andgeographyin the study of global history.
[27]Traditionally, historians have recorded events of the past, either in writing or by passing on anoral tradition, and have attempted to answer historical questions through the study of written documents and oral accounts. From the beginning, historians have also used such sources as monuments, inscriptions, and pictures. In general, the sources of historical knowledge can be separated into three categories: what is written, what is said, and what is physically preserved, and historians often consult all three.
[28]But writing is the marker that separates history from what comes before.
Archeologyis especially helpful in unearthing buried sites and objects, which contribute to the study of history. Archeological finds rarely stand alone, with narrative sources complementing its discoveries. Archeology's methodologies and approaches are independent from the field of history. "Historical archaeology" is a specific branch of archeology which often contrasts its conclusions against those of contemporary textual sources. For example, Mark Leone, the excavator and interpreter of historicalAnnapolis, Maryland, US, has sought to understand the contradiction between textual documents idealizing "liberty" and the material record, demonstrating the possession of slaves and the inequalities of wealth made apparent by the study of the total historical environment.
There are varieties of ways in which history can be organized, including chronologically,culturally, territorially, and thematically. These divisions are not mutually exclusive, and significant intersections are often present. It is possible for historians to concern themselves with both the very specific and the very general, although the modern trend has been toward specialization. The area calledBig Historyresists this specialization, and searches for universal patterns or trends. History has often been studied with some practical ortheoreticalaim, but also may be studied out of simple intellectual curiosity.
[29]History and prehistoryThehistory of the worldis the memory of the pastexperienceofHomo sapiens sapiensaround the world, as that experience has been preserved, largely in written records. By "prehistory", historians mean the recovery of knowledge of the past in an area where no written records exist, or where the writing of a culture is not understood. By studying painting, drawings, carvings, and other artifacts, some information can be recovered even in the absence of a written record. Since the 20th century, the study of prehistory is considered essential to avoid history's implicit exclusion of certain civilizations, such as those ofSub-Saharan Africaandpre-ColumbianAmerica. Historians in the West have been criticized for focusing disproportionately on theWestern world.
[30]In 1961, British historianE. H. Carrwrote:The line of demarcation between prehistoric and historical times is crossed when people cease to live only in the present, and become consciously interested both in their past and in their future. History begins with the handing down of tradition; and tradition means the carrying of the habits and lessons of the past into the future. Records of the past begin to be kept for the benefit of future generations.
[31]This definition includes within the scope of history the strong interests of peoples, such asIndigenous Australiansand New ZealandMāoriin the past, and the oral records maintained and transmitted to succeeding generations, even before their contact with European civilization.
HistoriographyHistoriography has a number of related meanings.
[32]Firstly, it can refer to how history has been produced: the story of the development ofmethodologyand practices (for example, the move from short-term biographical narrative toward long-term thematic analysis). Secondly, it can refer to what has been produced: a specific body of historical writing (for example, "medieval historiography during the 1960s" means "Works of medieval history written during the 1960s").
[32]Thirdly, it may refer to why history is produced: thephilosophy of history. As ameta-levelanalysis of descriptions of the past, this third conception can relate to the first two in that the analysis usually focuses on the narratives, interpretations,world view, use of evidence, or method of presentation of other historians. Professional historians also debate the question of whether history can be taught as a single coherent narrative or a series of competing narratives.
[33][34]Historical methodsThe following questions are used by historians in modern work.
The first four are known ashistorical criticism; the fifth,textual criticism; and, together, external criticism. The sixth and final inquiry about a source is called internal criticism.
The historical method comprises the techniques and guidelines by whichhistoriansuseprimary sourcesand other evidence to research and then towrite history.
HerodotusofHalicarnassus(484 BC–c.
425 BC)[35]has generally been acclaimed as the "father of history". However, his contemporaryThucydides(c.
460 BC–c.
400 BC) is credited with having first approached history with a well-developed historical method in his work theHistory of the Peloponnesian War. Thucydides, unlike Herodotus, regarded history as being the product of the choices and actions of human beings, and looked atcause and effect, rather than as the result of divine intervention (though Herodotus was not wholly committed to this idea himself).
[35]In his historical method, Thucydides emphasized chronology, a nominally neutral point of view, and that the human world was the result of the actions of human beings. Greek historians also viewed history ascyclical, with events regularly recurring.
[36]There were historical traditions and sophisticated use of historical method in ancient and medievalChina. The groundwork for professional historiography inEast Asiawas established by theHan dynastycourt historian known asSima Qian(145–90 BC), author of theRecords of the Grand Historian(Shiji). For the quality of his written work, Sima Qian is posthumously known as the Father ofChinese historiography. Chinese historians of subsequent dynastic periods in China used hisShijias the official format forhistorical texts, as well as for biographical literature.
[citation needed]Saint Augustinewas influential inChristianandWestern thoughtat the beginning of the medieval period. Through the Medieval andRenaissanceperiods, history was often studied through asacredor religious perspective. Around 1800, German philosopher and historianGeorg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegelbroughtphilosophyand a moresecularapproach in historical study.
[29]In the preface to his book, theMuqaddimah(1377), theArab historianandearly sociologist,Ibn Khaldun, warned of seven mistakes that he thought that historians regularly committed. In this criticism, he approached the past as strange and in need of interpretation. The originality of Ibn Khaldun was to claim that the cultural difference of another age must govern the evaluation of relevant historical material, to distinguish the principles according to which it might be possible to attempt the evaluation, and lastly, to feel the need for experience, in addition to rational principles, in order to assess a culture of the past. Ibn Khaldun often criticized "idlesuperstitionand uncritical acceptance of historical data". As a result, he introduced ascientific methodto the study of history, and he often referred to it as his "new science".
[37]His historical method also laid the groundwork for the observation of the role ofstate,communication,propagandaandsystematic biasin history,[38]and he is thus considered to be the "father of historiography"[39][40]or the "father of the philosophy of history".
[41]In the West, historians developed modern methods of historiography in the 17th and 18th centuries, especially in France and Germany. In 1851,Herbert Spencersummarized these methods:From the successive strata of our historical deposits, they [Historians] diligently gather all the highly colored fragments, pounce upon everything that is curious and sparkling and chuckle like children over their glittering acquisitions; meanwhile the rich veins of wisdom that ramify amidst this worthless debris, lie utterly neglected. Cumbrous volumes of rubbish are greedily accumulated, while those masses of rich ore, that should have been dug out, and from which golden truths might have been smelted, are left untaught and unsought[42]By the "rich ore" Spencer meant scientific theory of history. Meanwhile,Henry Thomas Buckleexpressed a dream of history becoming one day science:In regard to nature, events apparently the most irregular and capricious have been explained and have been shown to be in accordance with certain fixed and universal laws. This have been done because men of ability and, above all, men of patient, untiring thought have studied events with the view of discovering their regularity, and if human events were subject to a similar treatment, we have every right to expect similar results[43]Contrary to Buckle's dream, the 19th-century historian with greatest influence on methods becameLeopold von Rankein Germany. He limited history to "what really happened" and by this directed the field further away from science. For Ranke, historical data should be collected carefully, examined objectively and put together with critical rigor. But these procedures "are merely the prerequisites and preliminaries of science. The heart of science is searching out order and regularity in the data being examined and in formulating generalizations or laws about them."[44]As Historians like Ranke and many who followed him have pursued it,no, history is not a science. Thus if Historians tell us that, given the manner in which he practices his craft, it cannot be considered a science, we must take him at his word. If he is not doing science, then, whatever else he is doing, he is notdoingscience. The traditional Historian is thus no scientist and history, as conventionally practiced, is not a science.
[45]In the 20th century, academic historians focused less on epic nationalistic narratives, which often tended to glorify the nation orgreat men, to more objective and complex analyses of social and intellectual forces. A major trend of historical methodology in the 20th century was a tendency to treat history more as asocial sciencerather than as anart, which traditionally had been the case. Some of the leading advocates of history as a social science were a diverse collection of scholars which includedFernand Braudel,E. H. Carr,Fritz Fischer,Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie,Hans-Ulrich Wehler,Bruce Trigger,Marc Bloch,Karl Dietrich Bracher,Peter Gay,Robert Fogel,Lucien Febvre, andLawrence Stone. Many of the advocates of history as a social science were or are noted for their multidisciplinary approach. Braudel combined history with geography, Bracher history with political science, Fogel history with economics, Gay history with psychology, Trigger history with archeology, while Wehler, Bloch, Fischer, Stone, Febvre, and Le Roy Ladurie have in varying and differing ways amalgamated history with sociology, geography, anthropology, and economics. Nevertheless, these multidisciplinary approaches failed to produce a theory of history. So far only one theory of history came from the pen of a professional Historian.
[46]Whatever other theories of history we have, they were written by experts from other fields (for example, Marxian theory of history). More recently, the field ofdigital historyhas begun to address ways of using computer technology to pose new questions to historical data and generate digital scholarship.
In sincere opposition to the claims of history as a social science, historians such asHugh Trevor-Roper,John Lukacs,Donald Creighton,Gertrude Himmelfarb, andGerhard Ritterargued that the key to the historians' work was the power of theimagination, and hence contended that history should be understood as an art. French historians associated with theAnnales Schoolintroduced quantitative history, using raw data to track the lives of typical individuals, and were prominent in the establishment ofcultural history(cf.
histoire des mentalités). Intellectual historians such asHerbert Butterfield,Ernst NolteandGeorge Mossehave argued for the significance of ideas in history. American historians, motivated by the civil rights era, focused on formerly overlooked ethnic, racial, and socioeconomic groups. Another genre ofsocial historyto emerge in the post-WWII era wasAlltagsgeschichte(History of Everyday Life). Scholars such asMartin Broszat,Ian KershawandDetlev Peukertsought to examine what everyday life was like for ordinary people in 20th-century Germany, especially in theNaziperiod.
Marxist historianssuch asEric Hobsbawm,E. P. Thompson,Rodney Hilton,Georges Lefebvre,Eugene Genovese,Isaac Deutscher,C. L. R. James,Timothy Mason,Herbert Aptheker,Arno J. Mayer, andChristopher Hillhave sought to validateKarl Marx's theories by analyzing history from a Marxist perspective. In response to the Marxist interpretation of history, historians such asFrançois Furet,Richard Pipes,J. C. D. Clark,Roland Mousnier,Henry Ashby Turner, andRobert Conquesthave offered anti-Marxist interpretations of history.
Feministhistorians such asJoan Wallach Scott,Claudia Koonz,Natalie Zemon Davis,Sheila Rowbotham,Gisela Bock,Gerda Lerner,Elizabeth Fox-Genovese, andLynn Hunthave argued for the importance of studying the experience of women in the past. In recent years,postmodernistshave challenged the validity and need for the study of history on the basis that all history is based on the personal interpretation of sources. In his 1997 bookIn Defence of History,Richard J. Evansdefended the worth of history. Another defense of history from postmodernist criticism was the Australian historianKeith Windschuttle's 1994 book,The Killing of History.
Today, most historians begin their research process in the archives, on either a physical or digital platform. They often propose an argument and use their research to support it.
John H. Arnoldproposed that history is an argument, which creates the possibility of creating change.
[5]Digital information companies, such asGoogle, have sparked controversy over the role of internet censorship in information access.
[47]Marxian theoryTheMarxist theoryofhistorical materialismtheorises that society is fundamentally determined by thematerial conditionsat any given time – in other words, the relationships which people have with each other in order to fulfill basic needs such as feeding, clothing and housing themselves and their families.
[48]Overall,MarxandEngelsclaimed to have identified five successive stages of the development of these material conditions inWestern Europe.
[49]Marxist historiographywas once orthodoxy in the Soviet Union, but since the collapse of communism there in 1991, Mikhail Krom says it has been reduced to the margins of scholarship.
[50]Potential shortcomings in the production of historyMany historians believe that the production of history is embedded withbiasbecause events and known facts in history can be interpreted in a variety of ways.
Constantin Fasoltsuggested that history is linked to politics by the practice of silence itself.
[51]He also said: "A second common view of the link between history and politics rests on the elementary observation that historians are often influenced by politics."[51]According toMichel-Rolph Trouillot, the historical process is rooted in the archives, therefore silences, or parts of history that are forgotten, may be an intentional part of a narrative strategy that dictates how areas of history are remembered.
[24]Historical omissions can occur in many ways and can have a profound effect on historical records. Information can also purposely be excluded or left out accidentally. Historians have coined multiple terms that describe the act of omitting historical information, including: "silencing",[24]"selective memory",[52]and erasures.
[53]Gerda Lerner, a twentieth century historian who focused much of her work on historical omissions involving women and their accomplishments, explained the negative impact that these omissions had on minority groups.
[52]Environmental historianWilliam Crononproposed three ways to combat bias and ensure authentic and accurate narratives: narratives must not contradict known fact, they must make ecological sense (specifically for environmental history), and published work must be reviewed by scholarly community and other historians to ensure accountability.
[53]Areas of studyThese are approaches to history; not listed are histories of other fields, such ashistory of science,history of mathematicsandhistory of philosophy.
PeriodsHistorical study often focuses on events and developments that occur in particular blocks of time. Historians give theseperiods of timenames in order to allow "organising ideas and classificatory generalisations" to be used by historians.
[54]The names given to a period can vary with geographical location, as can the dates of the beginning and end of a particular period.
Centuriesanddecadesare commonly used periods and the time they represent depends on thedating systemused. Most periods are constructed retrospectively and so reflect value judgments made about the past. The way periods are constructed and the names given to them can affect the way they are viewed and studied.
[55]Prehistoric periodizationThe field of history generally leaves prehistory to archeologists, who have entirely different sets of tools and theories. Inarcheology, the usual method for periodization of the distantprehistoricpast is to rely on changes in material culture and technology, such as theStone Age,Bronze Age, andIron Age, with subdivisions that are also based on different styles of material remains. Here prehistory is divided into a series of "chapters" so that periods in history could unfold not only in a relative chronology but also narrative chronology.
[56]This narrative content could be in the form of functional-economic interpretation. There are periodizations, however, that do not have this narrative aspect, relying largely on relative chronology, and that are thus devoid of any specific meaning.
Despite the development over recent decades of the ability throughradiocarbon datingand other scientific methods to give actual dates for many sites or artefacts, these long-established schemes seem likely to remain in use. In many cases neighboring cultures with writing have left some history of cultures without it, which may be used. Periodization, however, is not viewed as a perfect framework, with one account explaining that "cultural changes do not conveniently start and stop (combinedly) at periodization boundaries" and that different trajectories of change need to be studied in their own right before they get intertwined with cultural phenomena.
[57]Geographical locationsParticulargeographicallocations can form the basis of historical study, for example,continents,countries, andcities. Understanding why historic events took place is important. To do this, historians often turn togeography. According toJules Micheletin his bookHistoire de France(1833), "without geographical basis, the people, the makers of history, seem to be walking on air".
[58]Weather patterns, the water supply, and the landscape of a place all affect the lives of the people who live there. For example, to explain why the ancient Egyptians developed a successful civilization, studying thegeography of Egyptis essential. Egyptian civilization was built on the banks of the Nile River, which flooded each year, depositing soil on its banks. The rich soil could help farmers grow enough crops to feed the people in the cities. That meant everyone did not have to farm, so some people could perform other jobs that helped develop the civilization. There is also the case ofclimate, which historians likeEllsworth HuntingtonandEllen Churchill Semplecited as a crucial influence on the course of history. Huntington and Semple further argued that climate has an impact on racial temperament.
[59]RegionsMilitaryMilitary historyconcerns warfare, strategies, battles, weapons, and the psychology of combat.
[60]The "new military history" since the 1970s has been concerned with soldiers more than generals, with psychology more than tactics, and with the broader impact of warfare on society and culture.
[61]ReligiousThe history of religion has been a main theme for both secular and religious historians for centuries, and continues to be taught in seminaries and academe. Leading journals includeChurch History,The Catholic Historical Review, andHistory of Religions. Topics range widely from political and cultural and artistic dimensions, to theology and liturgy.
[62]This subject studies religions from all regions and areas of the world where humans have lived.
[63]SocialSocial history, sometimes called thenew social history, is the field that includes history of ordinary people and their strategies and institutions for coping with life.
[64]In its "golden age" it was a major growth field in the 1960s and 1970s among scholars, and still is well represented in history departments. In two decades from 1975 to 1995, the proportion of professors of history in American universities identifying with social history rose from 31% to 41%, while the proportion of political historians fell from 40% to 30%.
[65]In the history departments of British universities in 2007, of the 5723 faculty members, 1644 (29%) identified themselves with social history whilepolitical historycame next with 1425 (25%).
[66]The "old" social history before the 1960s was a hodgepodge of topics without a central theme, and it often included political movements, like Populism, that were "social" in the sense of being outside the elite system. Social history was contrasted withpolitical history,intellectual historyand the history ofgreat men. English historianG. M. Trevelyansaw it as the bridging point between economic and political history, reflecting that, "Without social history, economic history is barren and political history unintelligible."[67]While the field has often been viewed negatively as history with the politics left out, it has also been defended as "history with the people put back in".
[68]SubfieldsThe chief subfields of social history include:CulturalCultural history replacedsocial historyas the dominant form in the 1980s and 1990s. It typically combines the approaches of anthropology and history to look at language, popular cultural traditions and cultural interpretations of historical experience. It examines the records and narrative descriptions of past knowledge, customs, and arts of a group of people. How peoples constructed their memory of the past is a major topic. Cultural history includes the study ofart in societyas well is the study of images and human visual production (iconography).
[69]DiplomaticDiplomatic historyfocuses on the relationships between nations, primarily regarding diplomacy and the causes of wars.
[70]More recently it looks at the causes of peace and human rights. It typically presents the viewpoints of the foreign office, and long-term strategic values, as the driving force of continuity and change in history. This type ofpolitical historyis the study of the conduct ofinternational relationsbetween states or across state boundaries over time. HistorianMuriel Chamberlainnotes that after the First World War, "diplomatic history replaced constitutional history as the flagship of historical investigation, at once the most important, most exact and most sophisticated of historical studies".
[71]She adds that after 1945, the trend reversed, allowing social history to replace it.
EconomicAlthough economic history has been well established since the late 19th century, in recent years academic studies have shifted more and more toward economics departments and away from traditional history departments.
[72]Business historydeals with the history of individual business organizations, business methods, government regulation, labour relations, and impact on society. It also includes biographies of individual companies, executives, and entrepreneurs. It is related to economic history. Business history is most often taught in business schools.
[73]EnvironmentalEnvironmental history is a new field that emerged in the 1980s to look at the history of the environment, especially in the long run, and the impact of human activities upon it.
[74]It is an offshoot of the environmental movement, which was kickstarted by Rachel Carson'sSilent Springin the 1960s.
WorldWorld history is the study of major civilizations over the last 3000 years or so. World history is primarily a teaching field, rather than a research field. It gained popularity in the United States,[75]Japan[76]and other countries after the 1980s with the realization that students need a broader exposure to the world as globalization proceeds.
It has led to highly controversial interpretations byOswald SpenglerandArnold J. Toynbee, among others.
The World History Association publishes theJournal of World Historyevery quarter since 1990.
[77]The H-World discussion list[78]serves as a network of communication among practitioners of world history, with discussions among scholars, announcements, syllabi, bibliographies and book reviews.
People'sApeople's historyis a type of historical work which attempts to account for historical events from theperspective of common people. A people's history is the history of the world that is the story of mass movements and of the outsiders. Individuals or groups not included in the past in other types of writing about history are the primary focus, which includes thedisenfranchised, theoppressed, thepoor, thenonconformists, and the otherwise forgotten people. The authors are typically on the left and have a socialist model in mind, as in the approach of theHistory Workshopmovement in Britain in the 1960s.
[79]IntellectualIntellectual history and the history of ideas emerged in the mid-20th century, with the focus on the intellectuals and their books on the one hand, and on the other the study of ideas as disembodied objects with a career of their own.
[80][81]GenderGender historyis a subfield of History andGender studies, which looks at the past from the perspective ofgender. The outgrowth of gender history fromwomen's historystemmed from many non-feministhistorians dismissing the importance of women in history. According to Joan W. Scott, "Gender is a constitutive element of social relationships based on perceived differences between the sexes, and gender is a primary way of signifying relations of power",[82]meaning that gender historians study the social effects of perceived differences between the sexes and how all genders utilize allotted power in societal and political structures. Despite being a relatively new field, gender history has had a significant effect on the general study of history. Gender history traditionally differs from women's history in its inclusion of all aspects of gender such as masculinity and femininity, and today's gender history extends to include people who identify outside of that binary.
LGBT historydeals with the first recorded instances of same-sex love and sexuality ofancient civilizations, and involves the history oflesbian,gay,bisexualandtransgender(LGBT) peoples and cultures around the world.
[83]PublicPublic historydescribes the broad range of activities undertaken by people with some training in the discipline of history who are generally working outside of specialized academic settings. Public history practice has quite deep roots in the areas of historic preservation, archival science, oral history, museum curatorship, and other related fields. The term itself began to be used in the U.S. and Canada in the late 1970s, and the field has become increasingly professionalized since that time. Some of the most common settings for public history are museums, historic homes andhistoric sites, parks, battlefields, archives, film and television companies, and all levels of government.
[84]HistoriansProfessional and amateur historians discover, collect, organize, and present information about past events. They discover this information through archeological evidence, written primary sources, verbal stories or oral histories, and other archival material. Inlists of historians, historians can be grouped by order of the historical period in which they were writing, which is not necessarily the same as the period in which they specialized.
Chroniclersandannalists, though they are not historians in the true sense, are also frequently included.
JudgementSince the 20th century, Western historians have disavowed the aspiration to provide the "judgement of history".
[85]The goals of historical judgements or interpretations are separate to those oflegal judgements, that need to be formulated quickly after the events and be final.
[86]A related issue to that of the judgement of history is that ofcollective memory.
PseudohistoryPseudohistoryis a term applied to texts which purport to be historical in nature but which depart from standardhistoriographical conventionsin a way which undermines their conclusions. It is closely related to deceptivehistorical revisionism. Works which draw controversial conclusions from new, speculative, or disputed historical evidence, particularly in the fields of national, political, military, and religious affairs, are often rejected as pseudohistory.
TeachingScholarship vs teachingA major intellectual battle took place in Britain in the early twentieth century regarding the place of history teaching in the universities. At Oxford and Cambridge, scholarship was downplayed. ProfessorCharles Harding Firth, Oxford's Regius Professor of history in 1904 ridiculed the system as best suited to produce superficial journalists. The Oxford tutors, who had more votes than the professors, fought back in defense of their system saying that it successfully produced Britain's outstanding statesmen, administrators, prelates, and diplomats, and that mission was as valuable as training scholars. The tutors dominated the debate until after the Second World War. It forced aspiring young scholars to teach at outlying schools, such as Manchester University, whereThomas Frederick Toutwas professionalizing the History undergraduate programme by introducing the study of original sources and requiring the writing of a thesis.
[87][88]In the United States, scholarship was concentrated at the major PhD-producing universities, while the large number of other colleges and universities focused on undergraduate teaching. A tendency in the 21st century was for the latter schools to increasingly demand scholarly productivity of their younger tenure-track faculty. Furthermore, universities have increasingly relied on inexpensive part-time adjuncts to do most of the classroom teaching.
[89]NationalismFrom the origins of national school systems in the 19th century, the teaching of history to promote national sentiment has been a high priority. In the United States after World War I, a strong movement emerged at the university level to teach courses in Western Civilization, so as to give students a common heritage with Europe. In the U.S. after 1980, attention increasingly moved toward teachingworld historyor requiring students to take courses in non-western cultures, to prepare students for life in a globalized economy.
[90]At the university level, historians debate the question of whether history belongs more to social science or to the humanities. Many view the field from both perspectives.
The teaching of history in French schools was influenced by theNouvelle histoireas disseminated after the 1960s byCahiers pédagogiques and Enseignementand other journals for teachers. Also influential was the Institut national de recherche et de documentation pédagogique, (INRDP). Joseph Leif, the Inspector-general of teacher training, said pupils children should learn about historians' approaches as well as facts and dates. Louis François, Dean of the History/Geography group in the Inspectorate of National Education advised that teachers should provide historic documents and promote "active methods" which would give pupils "the immense happiness of discovery." Proponents said it was a reaction against the memorization of names and dates that characterized teaching and left the students bored. Traditionalists protested loudly it was a postmodern innovation that threatened to leave the youth ignorant of French patriotism and national identity.
[91]Bias in school teachingIn several countries’ history textbooks are tools to foster nationalism and patriotism, and give students the official narrative about national enemies.
[92]In many countries, history textbooks are sponsored by the national government and are written to put the national heritage in the most favorable light. For example, in Japan, mention of theNanking Massacrehas been removed from textbooks and the entire Second World War is given cursory treatment. Other countries have complained.
[93]It was standard policy in communist countries to present only a rigid Marxist historiography.
[94][95]In theUnited States, textbooks published by the same company often differ in content from state to state.
[96]An example of content that is represented different in different regions of the country is the history of theSouthern states, whereslaveryand theAmerican Civil Warare treated as controversial topics.
McGraw-Hill Educationfor example, was criticized for describing Africans brought to American plantations as "workers" instead of slaves in a textbook.
[97]Academic historians have often fought against the politicization of the textbooks, sometimes with success.
[98][99]In 21st-century Germany, the history curriculum is controlled by the 16 states, and is characterized not by superpatriotism but rather by an "almost pacifistic and deliberately unpatriotic undertone" and reflects "principles formulated by international organizations such as UNESCO or the Council of Europe, thus oriented towards human rights, democracy and peace." The result is that "German textbooks usually downplay national pride and ambitions and aim to develop an understanding of citizenship centered on democracy, progress, human rights, peace, tolerance and Europeanness."[100]See alsoMethodsTopicsOther themesReferencesFurther readingExternal linksNavigation menuSearch
