old id = 1699
PhD in Data Science – NYU Center for Data Science
1003
https://cds.nyu.edu/phd-curriculum-info

NYU Center for Data ScienceHarnessing Data’s Potential for the WorldPhD in Data ScienceAn NRT-sponsored program in Data ScienceCurriculumCurriculumDegree RequirementsDegree requirements for the PhD in Data Science can be found in the GSAS bulletin –Doctor of Philosophy in Data Science.
To be awarded the Ph.D. in Data Science, students must, within 10 years of first enrolling:For more information on the Ph.D.
curriculum and requirements please visit the Ph.D. Student Handbook. Please note you will only be able to access the handbook through your NYU email address.
Required Course InformationStudents must successfully complete the following courses by the end of their third semester unless otherwise stated or show evidence that they have taken equivalent coursework elsewhere. Recent course pages are linked below. Course descriptions can be found in NYU’sAlbert Course Search.
39 credit hours of elective courses(for incoming students starting Fall 2020 and later)Students must successfully complete 39 credit hours of elective courses. Faculty at the Center for Data Science are experts in a broad range of data science topics, and the Center’s course offerings reflect that diversity. For example, students will be able to take courses in Deep Learning, Optimization, and Natural Language Processing.
Some of the electives offered at the Center for Data Science are below. Please see NYU’sAlbert Course Searchfor course descriptions.
Students can take electives outside of the Center of Data Science with permission from the Director of Graduate Studies (DGS).
Typical Schedule (Incoming Students Fall 2020 and later)Typically, a student’s first 3 years will follow a schedule like the one outlined below. The student’s remaining years will consist of electives and work on his or her research and dissertation.
Teaching Requirement(for incoming students starting Fall 2020 and later)By the end of the fourth year of study, each student must have served as a section leader or instructor for at least one course at the Center for Data Science. Courses on related topics outside the Center may also be used to satisfy this requirement subject to approval by the DGS. The student must also participate in the Center’s teacher training session at or prior to the semester in which they teach. In certain circumstances, the DGS may allow the student to satisfy this requirement by serving as a course assistant or as a grader. These exceptions will be determined by the DGS based on the availability of suitable recitations.
Comprehensive ExamThe comprehensive exam is designed to determine whether the candidate displays the requisite data science knowledge in the areas of machine learning and big data. The comprehensive exam consists of material from DS-GA 1003 Machine Learning and DS-GA 1004 Big Data.
To fulfill this requirement, students must receive an A- or above as their final grade for each of the courses above(for incoming students Fall 2020 and later). Students are expected to complete this requirement by the end of their second semester.
Students who do not pass the comprehensive exam requirement will be placed on academic probation and must complete the requirement by the end of their fourth semester.
Ph.D. students may sit for the final exam in these courses (if offered) without registering for the courses to fulfill the requirements.
Depth Qualifying Exam (DQE)No later than the end of the third semester, each student must:No later than the end of his fourth semester, the student must pass the depth qualifying exam (DQE). The exam may be taken no more than twice. The content of the exam is defined by the student’s DQE Committee, which must present a syllabus to the student at least 2 months before the date of the exam.
For incoming students Fall 2020 and later, the exam itself consists of a presentation by the student on original research carried out independently or in collaboration with faculty, research staff, or other students. This can include research done in the research rotations or other research conducted by the student in their area of interest. The goal of the DQE is to confirm the student’s knowledge of research in their area of interest.
Ph.D. DissertationDISSERTATION PROPOSAL APPROVALNo later than May 15 of their third year, students must have their thesis proposal approved. The student works with their research advisor to select a dissertation proposal approval committee, obtains approval of this committee from the DGS, submits a written dissertation proposal to the committee, and obtains the approval of the committee. The committee consists of at least three members, which may consist of individuals with similar standing outside of CDS. At least one member must be a CDS Faculty member or CDS Affiliated Faculty member.
DISSERTATION APPROVALEach student’s dissertation must be approved by all of the readers on the student’s defense committee. The Ph.D. defense committee must have at least five members, including the advisor, three of whom must be core CDS faculty or affiliated faculty, and one external member (in a related area from another NYU department or from an area institution, with approval from DGS). The membership of the defense committee is proposed by the student and approved by the DGS.
The approval of each reader is required. Their approvals are indicated by their signatures on a form provided by the Program Administrator or Director of Academic and Student Affairs. The defense is a presentation and question-answering session in which the student presents her work. The NYU public is invited as are the members of the defense committee. The student works with CDS staff to arrange a date for the defense and to publicize the defense.
In addition, students must comply with all of the procedures ofNYU’s Graduate of School of Arts and Science related to the submission of their dissertation.
©2022 NYU CDS 7th floor, 60 5th Ave, New York, NY, 10011NYU Center for Data Science
