old id = 2395
CAVstar® – Automotive sensing and control system - Fusion Processing
2012
https://www.fusionproc.com/automated-vehicle-systems/cavstar-automotive-sensing-and-control-system

CAVstar®Fusion Processing has developed an automated driving system (ADS) called CAVstar which can integrate with OEM systems or tailored and retrofitted any vehicle to give it AV level 4 or 5 of autonomy. The CAVstar system consists of Fusion's AI processing unit coupled with radar, LIDAR, optical cameras and ultrasonic sensors, which enable the system to analyse and understand its environment; to anticipate movements of other vehicles and vulnerable road users; to identify its surroundings and plot a safe course, then to generate the necessary inputs to the steering, braking and throttle systems on the vehicle.
CAVstar units have already been used as vehicle control systems in several high-profile autonomous vehicle projects, including full-sized buses, last-mile pods, small robots and off-road vehicles.
Delivering AV Level 4/5 vehiclesFusion can autonomise any size vehicle, be it electric, hybrid or ICE powered.
Autonomous or ‘driverless’ vehicles have become a reality. They have the potential to greatly improve mobility by offering safer and more efficient means of transport to a vast number of people.
To implement an effective autonomous drive system requires expertise across many disciplines. Our team is highly experienced in designing automotive sensing and control systems utilising artificial intelligence and robust safety systems to provide safe and efficient situational awareness, path planning, decision making and vehicle control. Together, these ensure vehicles can run effectively and safely in all conditions.
How CAVstar worksCAVstar comprises of processor and sensing units, and a central controller which can be tailored to individual vehicle and operating requirements.
CAVstar uses high-performance processing units running Fusion’s proprietary algorithms, which are combined with a range of sensor technologies including radar, LIDAR, ultrasonics and optical cameras. Together, these enable CAVstar systems to provide 360° situational awareness and vehicle control functions in all weathers and in all scenarios.
Contact Usto find out more about CAVstar.
Intelligent Sensing And Control Systems For Autonomous VehiclesThe world's leading provider of AV Level 4 technology for autonomous busesAutomationAUTONOMOUS VEHICLE SYSTEMSFusion Processing continues to develop state-of-the-art technology to autonomise vehicles and improve the safety of vulnerable road users.
AssistanceDRIVER ASSISTANCEADAS: We apply our autonomous tech and knowhow to regular driven vehicles.
Smart SensorsTRAFFIC TRAKSmart cities rely on smooth running highways for the transportation of goods and populations.
News BlogNews and stories from Fusion along with industry articles and featuresUK’s first full-sized autonomous bus takes to the roads of Scotland for the first timeUK’s first full-sized autonomous bus takes to the roads of Scotland for the first time...
Continue readingAUTONOMOUS TECH PIONEER FUSION PROCESSING BOLSTERS BOARD WITH APPOINTMENT OF NICK STURGE AS NON-EXECUTIVE CHAIRMANFusion Processing continues growth trajectory with new Board member Cutting edge automated drive system provider...
Continue readingFirst Glimpse Of UK’s First AV Level 4 Full-Sized Autonomous Bus ServiceBristol, UK – November 19th: Fusion Processing Ltd today announced that in partnership with Stagecoach,...
Continue readingPosts navigationFusion Processing LimitedFUTURE SPACEUWE North GateFilton RdStoke GiffordBristolBS34 8RBUnited KingdomContact UsTel: +44 (0) 117 911 9258contact@fusionproc.comLinkedinTwitterAbout Fusion ProcessingFusion Processing was founded in 2012 to design and build world leading systems for the automation of vehicles and technology to improve vehicle safety.
