old id = 1068
MIT Alumni Lounge | MIT Annual Fund | Giving to MIT | 10-100
unknown
http://giving-dev.mit.edu/alumni-lounge

MIT Alumni LoungeHelp us create a new home for alumni on the Infinite CorridorA new chapter in the story of the Institute’s graduatesThe MIT Alumni Lounge on the Infinite Corridor begins an important new chapter in the story of the Institute’s graduates and how they have helped to shape MIT’s efforts to make a better world for more than 160 years. This dynamic new space and its placement along the Institute’s most populous point of daily activity symbolically honors those contributions.
We now seek partners who understand how meaningful and historic this opportunity is. Through your generosity, you will be fulfilling the ultimate vision for the MIT Alumni Lounge on the Infinite Corridor: to secure and strengthen the legacy and future of MIT’s Association of Alumni and Alumnae.
Learn moreA forever home at MITLocated at 10-100, adjacent to Memorial Lobby and steps away from the entrance to Killian Court, the Lounge serves as a new landmark for the campus’s thousands of students, faculty, staff, alumni, and visitors. Across the hall is an eye-catching digital display with high-definition, touch-screen technology to engage MIT’s alumni community and provide information about MIT Alumni Association benefits and programming.
Range of uses for MIT alumniThe Lounge's light-filled, streamlined design and flexible walls offers visitors the option of establishing one open, airy space or enabling more privacy by creating two rooms. On one side is a designated visiting area with comfortable furniture. The other side side has a dedicated meeting space with a conference table and seating.
A reflection of MITThe décor within the room is modern and functional while also reflecting the deep history and famous iconography associated with the MIT experience. And while the Lounge is outfitted with cutting-edge technology, including audiovisual capabilities and a new HVAC system, the restoration of the room’s original terrazzo floor and stone border serves to connect past to present.
Centrally locatedAt the heart of campus, adjacent to Memorial Lobby and steps away from Killian CourtFlexible spaceVisitors have the option of establishing one open, airy space or enabling more privacy by creating two roomsPast and presentThe room is modern and functional while also reflecting MIT’s deep history and famous iconography
