old id = 1200
OII | Latest Reports
unknown
https://www.oii.ox.ac.uk/news-events/reports

Latest ReportsDeveloping and matching skills in the online platform economyBy CedefopCedefop’s CrowdLearn study is the first to examine skills development and skill matching practices in online platform work. It presents evidence from interviews with platform economy stakeholders, as well as crowdworkers themselves.
AI and the Arts: How Machine Learning is Changing Creative WorkBy Anne Ploin, Rebecca Eynon, Isis Hjorth, and Michael A. OsborneThere has been much talk about the potential of AI, but could it really transform the creative arts?Harmonising Artificial IntelligenceBy Mark McFadden, Kate Jones, Emily Taylor and Georgia Osborn, Oxford Information LabsThe draft EU AI Regulation is a far-reaching attempt to provide a regulatory foundation for the safe, fair, and innovative development of Artificial Intelligence in the European Union.
Surveillance as a ServiceBy Yung AuYung Au’s new report Surveillance as a Service: The European AI-Assisted Mass Surveillance Marketplace examines the European marketplace that produces and exports AI-assisted surveillance systems to governments around the world.
Reconfigure: Feminist Action Research in CybersecurityBy Julia Slupska, Scarlet Dawson Duckworth, Gina Neff, Nayana Prakash, Selina Cho, Linda Ma, Laura Shepherd, Hayyu Imanda, Hubert Au, Antonella Perini, and Romy MinkoThe discourse around cybersecurity can often seem academic and exclusive. The Reconfigure project aims to build a feminist alternative and this report sets out findings from a pilot study applying “action research” methods to cybersecurity questions.
Work in the Planetary Labour Market: Fairwork Cloudwork Ratings 2021By Kelle Howson, Hannah Johnston, Nancy Salem, Robbie Warin, Fabian Ferrari, Yihan Zhu, Pablo Aguera Reneses, Funda Ustek-Spilda, Daniel Arubayi, Srujana Katta, Shelly Steward, Matthew Cole, Adam Badger, and Mark GrahamWhat sort of working standards do gig economy remote workers face? This Fairwork report scores 17 platforms on the conditions they offer, and highlights the failure to offer basic standards of fairness across much of the cloudwork industry.
Libraries on the Front Lines of the Digital Divide: The Oxfordshire Digital Inclusion Project ReportBy Kira Allmann, Grant Blank, and Annique WongIn the era of ‘compulsory computing’, libraries offer crucial resources for those caught on the wrong side of the digital divide. Yet, this report finds that Oxfordshire libraries are significantly under-resourced when it comes to digital provision.
Fairwork UK Ratings 2021: Labour Standards in the Gig EconomyBy Alessio Bertolini, Matthew Cole, Mark Graham, Srujana Katta, Daniel Arubayi, and Funda Ustek-SpildaWorkers in the growing gig economy face persistent gaps in worker protections. This first Fairwork UK ratings report scores ten platforms on the working conditions that they offer and highlights where labour standards need improving.
Old Cracks, New Tech: Artificial Intelligence, Human Rights, and Good Governance in Highly Fragmented and Socially Stratified Societies: The Case of KenyaBy Nanjala NyabolaArtificial intelligence is touted as a solution to complex social and political issues around the world, particularly in developing countries like Kenya. This report argues that care is needed if AI is not to exacerbate cleavages in society instead.
China’s Public Diplomacy Operations: Understanding Engagement and Inauthentic Amplification of PRC Diplomats on Facebook and TwitterBy Marcel Schliebs, Hannah Bailey, Jonathan Bright, and Philip N. HowardThe Chinese state increasingly employs social media in its public diplomacy efforts. This report by Oxford researchers lays out the vast extent of China’s operations on Twitter, where it controls a huge number of highly active accounts.
Artificial Intelligence in Local Government: Enabling Artificial Intelligence for Good Governance in UK Local AuthoritiesBy Thomas VoglHow can local authorities in the UK use artificial intelligence towards good governance? This report from the Oxford Commission on AI and Good Governance identifies the key challenges and solutions for AI in local government.
Practical Lessons for Government AI Projects: Evidence from Four Smart City InitiativesBy Godofredo Ramizo JrGovernments around the world are launching projects that embed artificial intelligence (AI) in the delivery of public services. This report suggests how government officials can navigate the complexities of AI projects to deliver successful outcomes.
1 St Giles, Oxford, OX1 3JS, UK+44 (0)1865 287210General:enquiries@oii.ox.ac.ukPress:press@oii.ox.ac.ukFOLLOW US:INFORMATION FOR:We are using cookies to give you the best experience on our website.
You can find out more about which cookies we are using or switch them off insettings.
This website uses cookies so that we can provide you with the best user experience possible. Cookie information is stored in your browser and performs functions such as recognising you when you return to our website and helping our team to understand which sections of the website you find most interesting and useful.
Strictly Necessary Cookie should be enabled at all times so that we can save your preferences for cookie settings.
If you disable this cookie, we will not be able to save your preferences. This means that every time you visit this website you will need to enable or disable cookies again.
This website uses the following additional cookies from third party websites:Please enable Strictly Necessary Cookies first so that we can save your preferences!This website uses Google Tags and Google Analytics to collect anonymised information such as the number of visitors to the site, and the most popular pages. Keeping these cookies enabled helps the OII improve our website.
Enabling this option will allow cookies from:Please enable Strictly Necessary Cookies first so that we can save your preferences!
