old id = 1201
OII | AI and the Arts: How Machine Learning is Changing Creative Work
unknown
https://www.oii.ox.ac.uk/news-events/reports/ai-the-arts

AI and the Arts: How Machine Learning is Changing Creative WorkRecent advances in artificial intelligence have caused an explosion of interest in “creative AI”. While we know AI technology is changing many areas of work, its potential impact on creative tasks and creative work remains to be established. Through a case study of the use of current machine learning techniques in artistic work, our report investigate the scope of AI-enhanced creativity and whether human/algorithm synergies may help unlock human creative potential.
The report explores the changes in artists’ creative processes as machine learning becomes part of the artistic toolbox, and unpacks the creative interplays between artists and their machine learning-based tools. We find artists developed a range of new skills and adapted their creative processes to harness machine learning’s generative capabilities and make artworks on their own terms. We also find that these new activities and skills involved both continuity with previous creative processes and rupture from past practices.
Importantly, our report highlights that the creativity involved in artmaking remains beyond the capabilities of current ML technology. Despite the increased affordances of machine learning technologies for creative work, the relationship between artists and their media remained essentially unchanged, with machine learning a contemporary point in a long and rich tradition of leveraging technology in the arts.
Please cite as:Ploin, A., Eynon, R., Hjorth I. & Osborne, M.A. (2022). AI and the Arts: How Machine Learning is Changing Artistic Work. Report from the Creative Algorithmic Intelligence Research Project. Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford, UK.
AuthorsAnne PloinDPhil StudentAlongside work on AI, Anne’s doctoral research is in the sociology of knowledge, focusing on the online work of independent commissions and their role in British politics.
Professor Rebecca EynonProfessor of Education, the Internet and SocietyRebecca Eynon's research focuses on learning and the Internet, and the links between digital and social exclusion.
Dr Isis HjorthResearch AssociateIsis is a cultural sociologist focusing on emerging practices related to networked technologies. She is currently researching microwork and virtual production networks in Sub-Saharan Africa and Southeast Asia with multiple colleagues at the OII.
Professor Michael OsborneDyson Associate Professor in Machine Learning, Department of Engineering Science, University of OxfordRelated ProjectCreative Algorithmic Intelligence: Capabilities and ComplementarityThis project seeks to map present and future interfaces between human and artificial creative intelligence, and investigate the ways in which creative human/AI collaboration may contribute to human flourishing.
Related topics1 St Giles, Oxford, OX1 3JS, UK+44 (0)1865 287210General:enquiries@oii.ox.ac.ukPress:press@oii.ox.ac.ukFOLLOW US:INFORMATION FOR:We are using cookies to give you the best experience on our website.
You can find out more about which cookies we are using or switch them off insettings.
This website uses cookies so that we can provide you with the best user experience possible. Cookie information is stored in your browser and performs functions such as recognising you when you return to our website and helping our team to understand which sections of the website you find most interesting and useful.
Strictly Necessary Cookie should be enabled at all times so that we can save your preferences for cookie settings.
If you disable this cookie, we will not be able to save your preferences. This means that every time you visit this website you will need to enable or disable cookies again.
This website uses the following additional cookies from third party websites:Please enable Strictly Necessary Cookies first so that we can save your preferences!This website uses Google Tags and Google Analytics to collect anonymised information such as the number of visitors to the site, and the most popular pages. Keeping these cookies enabled helps the OII improve our website.
Enabling this option will allow cookies from:Please enable Strictly Necessary Cookies first so that we can save your preferences!
