old id = 1696
Master’s in Data Science – NYU Center for Data Science
unknown
https://cds.nyu.edu/masters-tracks

NYU Center for Data ScienceHarnessing Data’s Potential for the WorldMaster’s in Data ScienceTracksTracksCDS offers three “tracks” of study. And within the “Data Science” track, students can specify an area of interest. Students may change tracks until the end of their second semester; they are primarily for assisting CDS in understanding demand for different course offerings during admissions.
Tracks (For students starting program in Fall 2021 and later)Data Science TrackIn the Data Science track, students take six required courses and six elective courses from a diverse list of courses.
The areas of interest below fall within this track.
Data Science Biology TrackLarge datasets are revolutionizing our understanding of basic biology as well as of human health and disease. The Data Science Biology track is for students who want to further develop their computational skills and apply them to the biomedical sciences.
The capstone project for this track will be biology-based and completed with a biology or biotech mentor. Ordinarily, students pursuing this track take the following courses –Data Science – Biomedical Informatics (Medical School) TrackThe Data Science – Biomedical Informatics (Medical School) track is for students who are interested in the rapidly growing field of biomedical informatics, which has influenced many recent healthcare developments, including new opportunities for personalized medicine. These innovations, along with a recent growth in high-throughput genomics technologies, have created a high demand for skilled biomedical informatics professionals.
The capstone project for this track will be biomedicine-based and completed with a biomedicine mentor. In addition to the 6 required courses, ordinarily, students pursuing this track take the following courses –Tracks (For students starting program in Fall 2017-Fall 2020)Data Science TrackIn the Data Science track, students take six required courses and six elective courses from a diverse list of courses.
Data Science Big Data TrackThe Data Science Big Data track focuses on methods and techniques required to acquire, manage, analyze and visualize large volumes of data. Student will acquire deep understanding of algorithms and their complexity and gain hands-on experience on how to build end-to-end solutions to computational problems.
Ordinarily, students pursuing this track take 3 of the following courses –Data Science Mathematics and Data TrackThe Data Science Mathematics and Data track provides the mathematical background to understand and analyze modern data-analysis methods in areas such as deep learning, compressed sensing, high-dimensional statistics and graph signal processing. In addition, the track will provide exposure to fundamental research problems inspired by newly-developed data-science techniques.
Ordinarily, students pursuing this track take 2 of the following courses –Data Science Natural Language Processing TrackThe Data Science Natural Language Processing Track will give students the skills to build machine learning models that can understand, manipulate, or produce data expressed in natural language text.
Ordinarily, students pursuing this track take the following 2 courses in order:It is acceptable to substitute CSCI-GA 3033 Statistical NLP for DS-GA 1011.
Recommended courses:Data Science Physics TrackThe Data Science Physics Track provides the same solid foundation in data science and further develops modeling and inference skills in the context of compelling, data-intensive physics research topics. This track is ideal for applicants who have some physics background, are interested in transitioning into a career in data science, and wish to leverage those skills for a competitive advantage.
Ordinarily, students pursuing this track take the following courses –Data Science Biology Track(For students starting Fall 2018 and later)Large datasets are revolutionizing our understanding of basic biology as well as of human health and disease. The Data Science Biology track is for students who want to further develop their computational skills and apply them to the biomedical sciences.
The capstone project for this track will be biology-based and completed with a biology or biotech mentor. Ordinarily, students pursuing this track take the following courses –Data Science – Biomedical Informatics (Medical School) Track(For students starting Fall 2019 and later)The Data Science – Biomedical Informatics (Medical School) track is for students who are interested in the rapidly growing field of biomedical informatics, which has influenced many recent healthcare developments, including new opportunities for personalized medicine. These innovations, along with a recent growth in high-throughput genomics technologies, have created a high demand for skilled biomedical informatics professionals.
The capstone project for this track will be biomedicine-based and completed with a biomedicine mentor. In addition to the 6 required courses, ordinarily, students pursuing this track take the following courses –©2022 NYU CDS 7th floor, 60 5th Ave, New York, NY, 10011NYU Center for Data Science
