old id = 2400
Call for Experts - Supertrends
unknown
https://www.supertrends.com/call-for-experts

Join us in mapping the timeline of future trendsDo you have a specific area of expertise and a strong vision regarding the future? Share it with us and become a member of a strong community of like-minded individuals that are sharing a common goal: help shape a clear picture of the future, without bias or political interests. Our goal is to create the most extensive timeline of past, present, and future human innovation. Therefore, we are interested indiscoveries,inventions, ortechnological breakthroughsthat have a significant and global impact on various industries or society as a whole.
Start here with a few words from our founder Lars TvedeWhy join Supertrends as an expert?Promote your visionYour projects, ideas, and vision will be featured on our platform and shared with thousands of other business representatives, futurists, or investors.
Connect with peersFind out what other like-minded people think, start conversations, connect, and develop partnerships.
Stay up to dateBenefit from the crowd-sourced knowledge and have free access to a great part of our exclusive content, featured stories, and extended timelines.
Get paid projectsWe promote our collaborators to all members of our network of business people, investors of event organizers. Our platform facilitates contacting experts for paid speaking engagements, consulting projects, or author exclusive commissioned reports.
Free access to Supertrends ProYour contribution is very valuable to us. That is why we honor your engagement with unrestricted access to our Supertrends Pro app during the entire duration of our collaboration.
Expand your portfolioWe partner up with our experts to publish articles in scientific magazines, blogs, and other publications. You can be as involved as you want to, from simple citations to full-on authoring.
What would you like to do now?Become a Supertrends expertJoin our network of thinkers and entrepreneurs that build the innovations of tomorrow. Please, complete the application process in a few simple steps. If you’re already a member, you can skip this step and start contributing with new content right away.
Contribute with new contentIf you are already a member of our expert network, share your insights and opinions on the future directly with us. If you are not yet a member, please submit your application first in order to access this feature.
Contributing experts will receive free lifetime access to the Supertrends Pro app.
Featured milestonesWe are proud of being the host of a community of one of the most outstanding thinkers and shapers. Get to know some of their thoughts over the future.
2022: Quantum annealers are capable of representing molecules with a molecular weight of several thousandDr. Michael Helander is President and CEO at OTI Lumionics, a Canadian company developing production-ready advanced materials for OLED Displays. A part of his research is focused on discovering new materials using quantum-inspired methods as well as a combination of classical and quantum annealing devices.
2025: Captured CO2 is used to create products with high economic value.
Anja Juhl Jensen is a Senior Managing Consultant at IBM and has extensive experience working with disruptive technologies that drive sustainability. Other areas of expertise include innovation, cognitive solutions, SAP software, compliance, and security. Currently, Ms. Jensen is involved in projects focused on gathering data and develop real-time sustainability reports as well as product modernization using artificial intelligence, image recognition, and machine learning.
2028: An aquaporin 9 modulator is approved by FDA for the treatment of inflammatory conditionsThis milestone is co-published by Søren Nielsen and Michael Rutzler. Dr. Søren Nielsen holds a M.D. in biochemistry from Aarhus University in Denmark. Dr. Nielsen has been working as a full professor at Aarhus University and Aalborg University. As one of the leading figures in Aquaporins’ research, he worked very closely with Peter Agre, a Nobel Prize winner in chemistry, for many years. He is also the CEO of Synact Pharma ApS and a shareholder of Apoglyx AB.
2030: An anti-aging drug that can improve at least one of the aging parameters is approved by FDAHuang Gong is Associate professor at the Key Laboratory of Geriatrics, Beijing Institute of Geriatrics, Beijing Hospital. She graduated from Peking Union Medical College and worked as a research scholar at Yale University, School of Medicine. Currently, she works as an Associate professor at the Key Laboratory of Geriatrics, Beijing Institute of Geriatrics, Beijing Hospital.
2020: The first country makes cultured meat commercially available (happened in 2020).
Lejjy Gafour came from a background that has focused on human-centered design, research, enterprise architecture, iterative product development, strategy, and more. He is the co-founder of Future Fields, a biotechnology company focused on enabling solutions for the cellular agriculture industry worldwide. He thinks that the future is not shaped by a single discipline or idea alone.
Sign up for our NewsletterFor questions or more informationDenmarkSwitzerlandJoin Us
