old id = 2513
Will it bend? That is the question: Arm boffins boast of first flexible 32-bit chip • The Register
unknown
https://www.theregister.com/2021/07/21/plasticarm_flexible_chip

TopicsSecurityOff-PremOn-PremSoftwareOffbeatVendor VoiceVendor VoiceResourcesEdge + IoTWill it bend? That is the question: Arm boffins boast of first flexible 32-bit chipPlastic-backed TFT part positioned as perfect for the Internet of ThingsResearchers at chip designer Arm have shown off a prototype microprocessor - dubbed PlasticARM - built on flexible plastic, letting it curve around surfaces and even flex backwards and forwards.
Fabricated using a combination of metal-oxide, thin-film transistors (TFTs) and a flexible plastic substrate, offered commercially by PragmatIC asFlexLogIC, the PlasticARM is more or less a fully functional implementation ofArm's Cortex-M0+ core. The difference: you can bend it without the cracking sound you'd get from a traditional silicon chip.
Flexible circuits aren't new, but Arm claims PlasticARM is a breakthrough: a working 32-bit microprocessor boasting around 12 times the logic gates of its nearest competition. The only snag: all it can do, at the moment, is run through a test program burned into its read-only memory.
"The current ROM implementation does not allow changing or updating of the program code after fabrication," Arm's researchers admitted in their paper, published today in Nature, "although this would be possible in future implementations (for example, via programmable ROM)."The company positioned the research as key for the Internet of Things (IoT), the ever-growing march to put digital smarts into a range of devices. PlasticARM-based microcontrollers, the company claimed, can be produced at a very low cost and conform to curved or uneven surfaces – though it has yet to prove the latter, having conducted all testing with the prototype firmly attached to a very flat piece of glass.
When asked about this, James Myers, distinguished engineer at Arm and one of the paper's co-authors, toldThe Regthe team was "planning to perform the bendability tests of the flexible ICs while they are being flexed. Having said that, PragmatIC has already shown that their metal-oxide transistors can bend down to a radius of 5mm."When quizzed about use cases for flexible processors, Myers cited examples including "smart patches for wound care and healthcare applications, identification and provenance tracking, and safety or freshness indicators for fast moving consumer goods, or in waste management and packaging recycling."He added: "Although PlasticArm performs a fixed functionality where the program is burned into the ROM, a programmable ROM can potentially be used where the user can burn the program into the ROM in field."What Arm has created isn't yet competition for its more traditional – and brittle – silicon chips, however. The PlasticARM functional prototype was produced on a 0.8µm process node, or 800nm, while traditional Cortex-M0+ parts are typically made at 40nm – offering a feature size, and corresponding reduction in footprint, some 20 times smaller.
The part is also clocked at just 20kHz, with the theoretical limit of its capabilities placed at 40kHz when running at 4.5V instead of 3V. The Cortex-M0+ cores inRaspberry Pi's recently launched RP2040 system-on-chip, by contrast, are officially rated to a top speed of 133MHz – 3,325 times faster – and can reach considerably higher if operated outside spec.
There's a limit to how complex PlasticARM parts could get, too – in their current form, at least. "We anticipate that the lower-power cell libraries we are developing will support increased complexity, up to about 100,000 gates," the researchers noted, representing a fivefold increase over the prototype's gate count. "Moving to more than 1,000,000 gates will probably require complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) technology."Nevertheless, the team is confident that bendy processors have a place. "The aim of the TFT technology is not to replace silicon," the researchers explained. "As both technologies continue to evolve, it is likely that silicon will maintain advantages in terms of performance, density and power efficiency. However, TFTs enable electronic products with novel form factors and at cost points unachievable with silicon, thereby vastly expanding the range of potential applications.
"We envisage that PlasticARM will pioneer the development of low-cost, fully flexible smart integrated systems to enable an 'internet of everything' consisting of the integration of more than a trillion inanimate objects over the next decade into the digital world. Having an ultra-thin, conformable, low-cost, natively flexible microprocessor for everyday objects will unravel innovations leading to a variety of research and business opportunities."Myers remarked that PlasticArm "is an embedded microcontroller (ARM-v6M CPU with modest memory, peripherals and IO) with a fixed functionality. Currently, the FlexIC technology uses NMOS logic, and it will be possible to develop more complicated flexible processors when CMOS becomes possible in this process.""However," he added, "the primary driver for the technology is not to make increasingly complex circuitry but to add compute onto products in areas such as fast-moving consumer goods and in healthcare applications such as wound management."Myers also noted that the tech "scales down to smaller geometries similar to silicon. Currently the process technology is at 800nm and as the process matures, the geometries of the devices will shrink.
"The flexible IC technology is orthogonal to silicon and has different drivers. This research demonstrates that it is possible to embed processor technology where silicon isn’t a viable choice, such as when cost is a primary driver."He added: "For example, it will be too expensive to embed a silicon microcontroller into a label or package that costs only 10 cents. The key market areas for PlasticArm are sectors where form factor (thinness and flexibility) and cost are the highest priority. Whilst the technology will shrink further in the future, a 10nm process node would be uneconomic for the target markets, where a small amount of compute is needed and high density, high complexity circuitry is not required."PragmatIC toldThe Reg: "One of the great advantages of PragmatIC's technology is the cost, both upfront and per unit. In terms of upfront cost the NRE (non-recurring engineering) cost is orders of magnitude lower than conventional silicon.
"The simplicity of the process, with only 13 material layers, means that the turnaround time is on the order of days rather than months."PragmatIC added that it uses conventional manufacturing equipment but "has stripped out high-cost processes and steps," focussing "on achieving a low-cost implementation of the level of compute required for the applications being targeted. This leads to different choices than those in the silicon industry which is focussed more on very high density and very high compute capability."When we asked whether Arm had a roadmap to commercialisation for the technology, Myers responded that as the output of joint research by Arm's boffins and PragmatIC Semiconductor, PlasticArm "is a proof-of-concept prototype rather than a commercial product, which requires more prototyping, testing and qualification."The prototype part measures in at 59.2mm², has 28 pins, and a total of 56,340 devices – made up of 39,157 TFTs and 17,183 resistors – giving it an equivalent NAND2 gate count of 18,334. At its rated 20kHz clock speed, it draws 21mW giving it a power density of 0.4mW mm⁻².
"We do have a research roadmap to continue exploring sustainable applications of novel compute enabled by this technology. We're excited to see how and where this technology could be creatively adopted throughout the ecosystem."Their paper, "A natively flexible 32-bit Arm microprocessor" has been published in the journalNature. ®Similar topicsNarrower topicsOther stories you might likeImagine a future where racks of computer servers hum quietly in darkness below the surface of the Moon.
Here is where some of the most important data is stored, to be left untouched for as long as can be. The idea sounds like something from science-fiction, but one startup that recently emerged from stealth is trying to turn it into a reality. Lonestar Data Holdings has a unique mission unlike any other cloud provider: to build datacenters on the Moon backing up the world's data.
"It's inconceivable to me that we are keeping our most precious assets, our knowledge and our data, on Earth, where we're setting off bombs and burning things," Christopher Stott, founder and CEO of Lonestar, toldThe Register. "We need to put our assets in place off our planet, where we can keep it safe."In briefThe notorious Russian-aligned Conti ransomware gang has upped the ante in its attack against Costa Rica, threatening to overthrow the government if it doesn't pay a $20 million ransom.
Costa Rican president Rodrigo Chaves said that the country is effectively at war with the gang, who in April infiltrated the government's computer systems, gaining a foothold in 27 agencies at various government levels. The US State Department has offered a$15 millionreward leading to the capture of Conti's leaders, who it said have made more than $150 million from 1,000+ victims.
Conti claimed this week that it has insiders in the Costa Rican government, the APreported, warning that "We are determined to overthrow the government by means of a cyber attack, we have already shown you all the strength and power, you have introduced an emergency."Chinese cyberspies targeted two Russian defense institutes and possibly another research facility in Belarus, according to Check Point Research.
The new campaign, dubbed Twisted Panda, is part of a larger, state-sponsored espionage operation that has been ongoing for several months, if not nearly a year, according to the security shop.
In a technicalanalysis, the researchers detail the various malicious stages and payloads of the campaign that used sanctions-related phishing emails to attack Russian entities, which are part of the state-owned defense conglomerate Rostec Corporation.
The US Federal Trade Commission on Thursday said it intends to take action against educational technology companies that unlawfully collect data from children using online educational services.
In apolicy statement, the agency said, "Children should not have to needlessly hand over their data and forfeit their privacy in order to do their schoolwork or participate in remote learning, especially given the wide and increasing adoption of ed tech tools."The agency says it will scrutinize educational service providers to ensure that they are meeting their legal obligations under COPPA, the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act.
The saga surrounding Arm's joint venture in China just took another intriguing turn: a mysterious firm named Lotcap Group claims it has signed a letter of intent to buy a 51 percent stake in Arm China from existing investors in the country.
In a Chinese-languagepress releaseposted Wednesday, Lotcap said it has formed a subsidiary, Lotcap Fund, to buy a majority stake in the joint venture. However, reporting by one newspaper suggested that the investment firm still needs the approval of one significant investor to gain 51 percent control of Arm China.
The development comes a couple of weeks after Arm China said that its former CEO, Allen Wu,was refusing once againto step down from his position, despite the company's boardvoting in late Aprilto replace Wu with two co-chief executives. SoftBank Group, which owns 49 percent of the Chinese venture, has been trying to unentangle Arm China from Wu as the Japanese tech investment giant plans for aninitial public offeringof the British parent company.
SmartNICs have the potential to accelerate enterprise workloads, but don't expect to see them bring hyperscale-class efficiency to most datacenters anytime soon, ZK Research's Zeus Kerravala toldThe Register.
SmartNICs are widelydeployedin cloud and hyperscale datacenters as a means to offload input/output (I/O) intensive network, security, and storage operations from the CPU, freeing it up to run revenue generating tenant workloads. Some more advanced chips even offload thehypervisorto further separate the infrastructure management layer from the rest of the server.
Despite relative success in the cloud and a flurry of innovation from the still-limited vendor SmartNIC ecosystem, including Mellanox (Nvidia), Intel, Marvell, and Xilinx (AMD), Kerravala argues that the use cases for enterprise datacenters are unlikely to resemble those of the major hyperscalers, at least in the near term.
The US is racing to catch up with China in supercomputing performance amid fears that the country may widen its lead in exascale computers over the next decade, according to reports.
The Frontier supercomputer at Oak Ridge National Laboratory is expected to be the first exascale system in the US once it is fully operational, but China already hastwo exascale systems up and runningsince last year, as reported on our sister siteThe Next Platform.
This lead may widen as the US has three exascale systems in the pipeline, while China aims to have up to 10 operational systems by 2025, says a report in theFinancial times.
Laptop vendor Framework Computer has launched new faster models. Unlike in the case of any other laptop maker, if you already have one, this isgoodnews.
Modern laptops tend to be promoted on the basis of thinness and lightness, and the Frameworkrangeis no different. The machines have 13.5-inch (8.89cm) screens, are just under 16mm thick (0.6 inch), and weigh 1.3kg (2lb 14oz).
The newmodelshave faster 12th-generation Intel Core CPUs.
Two and a half years after its first disastrous launch, Boeing has once again fired its CST-100 Starliner capsule at the International Space Station.
This time it appeared to go well, launching at 18:54 ET from Space Launch Complex 41 at Cape Canaveral. The RD-180 main engine and twin solid rocket boosters of the Atlas V performed as planned before Starliner was pushed to near orbital velocity by the Centaur upper stage.
After separation from the Centaur, Starliner fired its own thrusters for orbital insertion and is on course for the ISS. Docking is scheduled for approximately 19:10 ET today (23:10 UTC).
US president Joe Biden kicked off his first Asian tour since taking office in South Korea, where he visited a Samsung semiconductor fab said to be the model for the company's planned plant in Taylor, Texas.
While speaking at the Samsung Electronics Pyeongtaek Campus, Biden said the region will be a key part of the next several decades – a reason "to invest in one another to deepen our business ties.".
Much of the talk on Biden's five-day trip to South Korea and Japan will center around broader deepening of economic and business ties. In Pyeongtaek, however, the emphasis was on semiconductor cooperation. While touring the plant with recently elected South Korean president Yoon Suk Yeol, Bidennoted"these little chips are the key to propelling us into the next era of humanity's technological development."At Meta's first Conversations keynote yesterday, the company announced the WhatsApp Cloud API, aimed at improving the customer service experience for businesses of all sizes.
Meta already has theWhatsApp Business API, the first revenue-generating enterprise product for the otherwise free messaging app, where companies pay WhatsApp on a per-message basis and can use the platform to direct customer communications to other lines like SMS, email, other apps, and more.
It's basically another online presence where enterprises can set up shop to make it easier for customers to get in touch. But the WhatsApp Business API is on-premises and would normally need a solutions provider like Twilio to facilitate back-end integration.
ABOUT USMORE CONTENTSITUATION PUBLISHINGThe Register- Independent news and views for the tech community. Part of Situation PublishingSIGN UP TO OUR DAILY NEWSLETTERBiting the hand that feeds IT © 1998–2022
