old id = 2557
Intel ramps up digital neuron count with Loihi 2 chip • The Register
unknown
https://www.theregister.com/2021/10/01/artificial_brain_intel

TopicsSecurityOff-PremOn-PremSoftwareOffbeatVendor VoiceVendor VoiceResourcesAI + MLIntel offers Loihi 2 to boffins: A 7nm chip with more than 1m programmable neuronsBefore you call it dumb, take a look at its biological counterparts on this planetRobots with Intel Inside brains? That's what Chipzilla has in mind with its Loihi 2 neuromorphic chip, which tries to mimics the human brain.
This is Intel's stab at creating more intelligent computers that can efficiently discover patterns and associations in data and from that learn to make smarter and smarter decisions.
It's not a processor in the traditional sense, and it's aimed at experimentation rather than production use. As you can see from the technical brief [PDF], it consists of up to 128 cores that each have up to 8,192 components that act like natural spiking neurons that send messages to each other and form a neural network that tackles a particular problem.
The cores also implement the synapses that transmit information between the neurons, which can each send binary spikes (1s or 0s) or graded spikes (32-bit payload value).
An overview of the Loihi 2 chip architecture ... Source: Intel. Click to enlargeEach neuron can be assigned a program written using a basic instruction set to perform a task, and the whole thing is directed by six normal CPU cores that run software written in, say, C. There's also external IO to communicate with other hardware, and interfaces to link multiple Loihi 2 chips together into a mesh as required. There are other features, such as three-factor learning rules, that you should see the technical brief for more details. The previous generation didn't have graded spikes nor programmable neurons.
The 'highlights' of the Loihi 2 per-neuron instruction set ... Source: Intel. Click to enlargeThere's a race to replicate the brain electronically to run powerful AI applications quickly and without making, say, a massive dent in the electric bill. Samsung just said it wants toputhuman-like brain structures on a chip. IBM is alsodeveloping hardwaredesigned around the brain.
Intel's latest Loihi isten times fasterthan the previous-generation componentannouncedfour years ago to this month, it is claimed.
"Loihi 2 is currently a research chip only," said Garrick Orchard, a research scientist at Intel Labs via email withThe Register. "Its core-based architecture is scalable and could enable future flavors of the chip — when the technology matures — that could have a range of commercial applications spanning data center to edge devices."Each Loihi 2 chip has potentially more than a million digital neurons, up from 128,000 in its predecessor. To put that in context, there are roughly 90 billion interconnected neurons in the human brain, which should give you an idea of the level of intelligence possible with this hardware right now.
The digital neurons compute asynchronously in parallel, and can be customized by their programming. Loihi 2 supports a maximum of 120 million synapses, compared to over a trillion synapses in the human brain, and has 2.3 billion transistors in a 31 mm2die area. According to Intel, its digital circuits run "up to 5000x faster than biological neurons."The chip is an early sample of theIntel 4manufacturing node, which is the semiconductor giant's brand name for its much-delayed 7nm process node, and uses extreme ultraviolet (EUV) to etch the chips. Loihi 1 was made using a 14nm process.
"With Loihi 2 being fabricated with a pre-production version of the Intel 4 process, this underscores the health and progress of Intel 4," an Intel spokeswoman told us.
Intel, by the way, showed off the wafer of Intel 4 CPU family, code-named Meteor Lake and aimed at desktops and mobile PCs, at a press event in July, the first time it had done so. Chips using that microarchitecture are expected to ship in 2023, hence Loihi 2 is a glimpse of what's to come manufacturing-wise.
Intel is working with the research community to come up with applications for Loihi 2. Its predecessor was used tocreatesystems to identify smells, manage robotic arms, and optimize railway scheduling.
There are no projects underway with Loihi 2 yet, though partners that worked with the original Loihi "have communicated their excitement for new capabilities within Loihi 2," Orchard said.
One such partner is America's Los Alamos National Laboratory, which is using the first-gen Loihi chip as an artificial brain tounderstandthe benefits of sleep.
An open-source programming framework called Lava was introduced alongside Loihi 2 with which developers can write AI applications that can be implemented in the chip's neural network. The underlying tools will also support Robotic Operating System (ROS), TensorFlow, Pytorch and other frameworks.
The Lava framework is available fordownloadon Github.
This neuromorphic hardware will be available to researchers via Intel's Neuromorphic Research Cloud. The available components includes the Oheo Gulch board, which includes a single-socket Loihi 2 linked to an FPGA. A system code-named Kapoho Point with eight Loihi 2 chips will be available soon. ®Our friends over atThe Next Platformhave more analysis and info on Loihi 2right here.
Similar topicsBroader topicsNarrower topicsOther stories you might likeImagine a future where racks of computer servers hum quietly in darkness below the surface of the Moon.
Here is where some of the most important data is stored, to be left untouched for as long as can be. The idea sounds like something from science-fiction, but one startup that recently emerged from stealth is trying to turn it into a reality. Lonestar Data Holdings has a unique mission unlike any other cloud provider: to build datacenters on the Moon backing up the world's data.
"It's inconceivable to me that we are keeping our most precious assets, our knowledge and our data, on Earth, where we're setting off bombs and burning things," Christopher Stott, founder and CEO of Lonestar, toldThe Register. "We need to put our assets in place off our planet, where we can keep it safe."In briefThe notorious Russian-aligned Conti ransomware gang has upped the ante in its attack against Costa Rica, threatening to overthrow the government if it doesn't pay a $20 million ransom.
Costa Rican president Rodrigo Chaves said that the country is effectively at war with the gang, who in April infiltrated the government's computer systems, gaining a foothold in 27 agencies at various government levels. The US State Department has offered a$15 millionreward leading to the capture of Conti's leaders, who it said have made more than $150 million from 1,000+ victims.
Conti claimed this week that it has insiders in the Costa Rican government, the APreported, warning that "We are determined to overthrow the government by means of a cyber attack, we have already shown you all the strength and power, you have introduced an emergency."Chinese cyberspies targeted two Russian defense institutes and possibly another research facility in Belarus, according to Check Point Research.
The new campaign, dubbed Twisted Panda, is part of a larger, state-sponsored espionage operation that has been ongoing for several months, if not nearly a year, according to the security shop.
In a technicalanalysis, the researchers detail the various malicious stages and payloads of the campaign that used sanctions-related phishing emails to attack Russian entities, which are part of the state-owned defense conglomerate Rostec Corporation.
The US Federal Trade Commission on Thursday said it intends to take action against educational technology companies that unlawfully collect data from children using online educational services.
In apolicy statement, the agency said, "Children should not have to needlessly hand over their data and forfeit their privacy in order to do their schoolwork or participate in remote learning, especially given the wide and increasing adoption of ed tech tools."The agency says it will scrutinize educational service providers to ensure that they are meeting their legal obligations under COPPA, the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act.
The saga surrounding Arm's joint venture in China just took another intriguing turn: a mysterious firm named Lotcap Group claims it has signed a letter of intent to buy a 51 percent stake in Arm China from existing investors in the country.
In a Chinese-languagepress releaseposted Wednesday, Lotcap said it has formed a subsidiary, Lotcap Fund, to buy a majority stake in the joint venture. However, reporting by one newspaper suggested that the investment firm still needs the approval of one significant investor to gain 51 percent control of Arm China.
The development comes a couple of weeks after Arm China said that its former CEO, Allen Wu,was refusing once againto step down from his position, despite the company's boardvoting in late Aprilto replace Wu with two co-chief executives. SoftBank Group, which owns 49 percent of the Chinese venture, has been trying to unentangle Arm China from Wu as the Japanese tech investment giant plans for aninitial public offeringof the British parent company.
SmartNICs have the potential to accelerate enterprise workloads, but don't expect to see them bring hyperscale-class efficiency to most datacenters anytime soon, ZK Research's Zeus Kerravala toldThe Register.
SmartNICs are widelydeployedin cloud and hyperscale datacenters as a means to offload input/output (I/O) intensive network, security, and storage operations from the CPU, freeing it up to run revenue generating tenant workloads. Some more advanced chips even offload thehypervisorto further separate the infrastructure management layer from the rest of the server.
Despite relative success in the cloud and a flurry of innovation from the still-limited vendor SmartNIC ecosystem, including Mellanox (Nvidia), Intel, Marvell, and Xilinx (AMD), Kerravala argues that the use cases for enterprise datacenters are unlikely to resemble those of the major hyperscalers, at least in the near term.
The US is racing to catch up with China in supercomputing performance amid fears that the country may widen its lead in exascale computers over the next decade, according to reports.
The Frontier supercomputer at Oak Ridge National Laboratory is expected to be the first exascale system in the US once it is fully operational, but China already hastwo exascale systems up and runningsince last year, as reported on our sister siteThe Next Platform.
This lead may widen as the US has three exascale systems in the pipeline, while China aims to have up to 10 operational systems by 2025, says a report in theFinancial times.
Laptop vendor Framework Computer has launched new faster models. Unlike in the case of any other laptop maker, if you already have one, this isgoodnews.
Modern laptops tend to be promoted on the basis of thinness and lightness, and the Frameworkrangeis no different. The machines have 13.5-inch (8.89cm) screens, are just under 16mm thick (0.6 inch), and weigh 1.3kg (2lb 14oz).
The newmodelshave faster 12th-generation Intel Core CPUs.
Two and a half years after its first disastrous launch, Boeing has once again fired its CST-100 Starliner capsule at the International Space Station.
This time it appeared to go well, launching at 18:54 ET from Space Launch Complex 41 at Cape Canaveral. The RD-180 main engine and twin solid rocket boosters of the Atlas V performed as planned before Starliner was pushed to near orbital velocity by the Centaur upper stage.
After separation from the Centaur, Starliner fired its own thrusters for orbital insertion and is on course for the ISS. Docking is scheduled for approximately 19:10 ET today (23:10 UTC).
US president Joe Biden kicked off his first Asian tour since taking office in South Korea, where he visited a Samsung semiconductor fab said to be the model for the company's planned plant in Taylor, Texas.
While speaking at the Samsung Electronics Pyeongtaek Campus, Biden said the region will be a key part of the next several decades – a reason "to invest in one another to deepen our business ties.".
Much of the talk on Biden's five-day trip to South Korea and Japan will center around broader deepening of economic and business ties. In Pyeongtaek, however, the emphasis was on semiconductor cooperation. While touring the plant with recently elected South Korean president Yoon Suk Yeol, Bidennoted"these little chips are the key to propelling us into the next era of humanity's technological development."At Meta's first Conversations keynote yesterday, the company announced the WhatsApp Cloud API, aimed at improving the customer service experience for businesses of all sizes.
Meta already has theWhatsApp Business API, the first revenue-generating enterprise product for the otherwise free messaging app, where companies pay WhatsApp on a per-message basis and can use the platform to direct customer communications to other lines like SMS, email, other apps, and more.
It's basically another online presence where enterprises can set up shop to make it easier for customers to get in touch. But the WhatsApp Business API is on-premises and would normally need a solutions provider like Twilio to facilitate back-end integration.
ABOUT USMORE CONTENTSITUATION PUBLISHINGThe Register- Independent news and views for the tech community. Part of Situation PublishingSIGN UP TO OUR DAILY NEWSLETTERBiting the hand that feeds IT © 1998–2022
