old id = 3557
Mailchimp's Design Tool Looks to Automate Branding | PCMag
unknown
https://www.pcmag.com/news/mailchimps-design-tool-looks-to-automate-branding

Mailchimp's Design Tool Looks to Automate BrandingMailchimp is using artificial intelligence to let businesses design multi-channel marketing campaigns automatically and without the need for human designers.
Mailchimpannounced yesterday its new Auto Designer service that automatically creates branded designs sized for multichannel marketing campaigns, includingemail marketing,social media postsand landing pages. According to Mailchimp, what powers Auto Designer is a combination of machine learning (ML) and experience.
"Mailchimp has spent years analyzing what works and what doesn’t in marketing content. Now we’re using machine learning to build marketing assets that just work for entrepreneurs who, frankly, don’t have the time or resources to do it themselves. Small to midsize businesses (SMBs) everywhere — whether the restaurant on the corner or the online fashion retailer — are under more pressure than ever, and have limited time and money to spend on marketing. With Auto Designer, we hope to remove these hurdles by automatically and intelligently creating beautiful, on-brand designs with a consistent look and feel," said John Foreman, Mailchimp’s chief product officer.
But what about the process of consulting with designers to get the right look and feel for materials that will be, after all, highly depending on individual branding? According to Foreman, this could be a thing of the past. "No consultation is needed" claims Foreman. "Auto Designer is anartificial intelligence (AI)system that creates myriad designs for users to pick from based on their own logo and brand style. SMBs can get what they need in seconds, without the need to wait on a human designer."Good TimingAs you might expect, the timing of Mailchimp's launch of Auto Designer is no accident. While the company has been working on the new capability for some time, the launch has taken both the pandemic and the need for social distancing into account. Auto Designer fits neatly into the new working reality faced by many companies. Social distancing in particular has caused many SMBs to re-double their online sales and marketing efforts across all digital channels, especially social media marketing, email marketing, and newsletters all of which are Mailchimp specialties.
"SMB owners need support now more than ever to sustain their business online and stay connected with their customers. With limitations on in-person interactions, the touch-points SMBs have with their customers online—on an owned website, via email campaigns, or on social media—have more importance than ever before," Foreman pointed out. "These tools can help small business owners get online and stay connected to their customers. Auto Designer was built to follow best marketing and design practices to make sure users reach their target audiences and see higher conversions. This is where Mailchimp can leverage its email marketing expertise for to create better sales opportunities."Auto Designer is part of Mailchimp’sContent Studio(Opens in a new window), which is available for free for up to seven marketing channels and has paid subscription plans ranging from $9.99 a month. The tool aims to minimize time and effort spent by SMBs by enabling users to create integrated campaigns with a professional and consistent look and feel. Ideally, it could save hours of digging around images and logos to achieve a universal branding look and feel to create email templates, landing pages, and social posts for LinkedIn, Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter.
"An Instagram post isn’t the same dimensions as an email header, but the Auto Designer handles all marketing channels seamlessly, maintaining a brand’s style no matter the marketing channel. That’s the beauty of having it as a tool in the all-in-one platform," Foreman added.
Recommended by Our EditorsAuto Designer users can also import their designs fromCanva(Opens in a new window)orAdobe(Opens in a new window)into Mailchimp’s Content Studio, so all of their designs are accessible in one place. Having a company's brand assets available from a central repository makes assembling content a lot easier, specially if various designers or marketers are working off the same source material for different marketing projects.
"Our goal is to provide small businesses with everything they need to get their business online," Foreman said. "To help them find customers, to look professional, and grow. The Auto Designer helps create marketing that consumers engage with more often, growing a business’s customer base faster, all while looking like a larger brand with its own design agency on retainer."Mailchimp claims that during initial testing, users saw a 14 per cent increase in engagement on email campaigns that used designs created by the Auto Designer tool.
Get Our Best Stories!Sign up forWhat's New Nowto get our top stories delivered to your inbox every morning.
This newsletter may contain advertising, deals, or affiliate links. Subscribing to a newsletter indicates your consent to ourTerms of UseandPrivacy Policy. You may unsubscribe from the newsletters at any time.
Your subscription has been confirmed. Keep an eye on your inbox!AdvertisementDig Deeper With Related StoriesPCMag Stories You’ll LikeAbout Gadjo SevillaGadjo C. Sevilla is Analyst, Business for PCMag. Gadjo has covered various aspects of technology including smartphones, laptops, business solutions, and app ecosystems. He began covering technology and innovation 20 years ago for national newspapers, magazines, and various websites including The Canadian Reviewer, which is a tech enthusiast blog he founded in 2008. Gadjo’s work has appeared globally in various print and online publications including MacWorld Canada, PCWorld Canada, ITBusiness.ca, WhatsYourTech.ca, The Calgary Herald, The Toronto Star, and Metro News. You can follow him on Twitter @gadjosevilla, connect with him on LinkedIn, or email him at[email protected]Read the latest from Gadjo SevillaHonest, Objective ReviewsPCMag.com is a leading authority on technology, delivering Labs-based, independent reviews of the latest products and services. Our expert industry analysis and practical solutions help you make better buying decisions and get more from technology.
© 1996-2022 Ziff Davis. PCMag Digital GroupPCMag, PCMag.com and PC Magazine are among the federally registered trademarks of Ziff Davis and may not be used by third parties without explicit permission. The display of third-party trademarks and trade names on this site does not necessarily indicate any affiliation or the endorsement of PCMag. If you click an affiliate link and buy a product or service, we may be paid a fee by that merchant.
