old id = 3644
Stephen Hawking warned about the perils of artificial intelligence – yet AI gave him a voice
unknown
https://theconversation.com/stephen-hawking-warned-about-the-perils-of-artificial-intelligence-yet-ai-gave-him-a-voice-93416

EditionStephen Hawking warned about the perils of artificial intelligence – yet AI gave him a voiceAuthorJaharis Faculty Fellow in Health Law and Intellectual Property, DePaul UniversityDisclosure statementAna Santos Rutschman does not work for, consult, own shares in or receive funding from any company or organization that would benefit from this article, and has disclosed no relevant affiliations beyond their academic appointment.
PartnersView all partnersThelate Stephen Hawkingwas a major voice in the debate about how humanity can benefit from artificial intelligence. Hawking madeno secret of his fearsthat thinking machines could one day take charge. He went as far as predicting that future developments in AI “could spell the end of the human race.”But Hawking’s relationship with AI was far more complex than this often-cited soundbite. The deep concerns he expressed were about superhuman AI, the point at which AI systems not only replicate human intelligence processes, but also keep expanding them, without our support – a stage that is at best decades away,if it ever happens at all. And yet Hawking’s very ability to communicate those fears, and all his other ideas, came to depend on basic AI technology.
Hawking’s conflicted relationship with AIAt theintellectual propertyandhealth lawcenters at DePaul University, my colleagues and I study the effects of emerging technologies like the ones Stephen Hawking worried about. At its core, the concept of AI involves computational technology designed to make machinesfunction with foresightthat mimics, andultimately surpasses, human thinking processes.
Hawking cautioned against an extreme form of AI, in which thinking machines would “take off” on their own, modifying themselves and independently designing and building ever more capable systems. Humans, bound by the slow pace of biological evolution, would be tragically outwitted.
AI as a threat to humanity?Well before it gets to the point of superhuman technology, AI can be put to terrible uses. Already, scholars and commentators worry thatself-flying drones may be precursorstolethal autonomous robots.
Today’s early stage AI raises several other ethical and practical problems, too. AI systems are largely based onopaque algorithmsthat make decisions even their own designers may beunable to explain. The underlying mathematical modelscan be biased, andcomputational errorsmay occur. AI may progressively displace human skills andincrease unemployment. And limited access to AI mightincrease global inequality.
TheOne Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence, launched by Stanford University in 2014, highlighted some of these concerns. But so far it has identified no evidence that AI will pose any “imminent threat” to humankind, as Hawking feared.
Still, Hawking’s views on AI are somewhat less alarmist and more nuanced than he usually gets credit for. At their heart, they describe the need to understand and regulate emerging technologies. Herepeatedly calledformore researchon the benefits and dangers of AI. And hebelievedthat even non-superhuman AI systems could help eradicate war, poverty and disease.
Hawking talksThis apparent contradiction – a fear of humanity being eventually overtaken by AI but optimism about its benefits in the meantime – may have come from his own life: Hawking hadcome to rely on AIto interact with the world.
Unable to speak since 1985, he used a series of differentcommunication systemsthat helped him talk and write, culminating in thenow-legendary computeroperated byone musclein his right cheek.
The first iteration of the computer program was exasperatingly slow and prone to errors.
Very basic AI changed that. Anopen-sourceprogram made his word selection significantly faster. More importantly, it used artificial intelligence to analyze Hawking’s own words, and then used that information to help him express new ideas. By processing Hawking’s books, articles and lecture scripts, the system got so good that he did not even have to type the term people most associate with him, “the black hole.” When he selected “the,” “black” would automatically be suggested to follow it, and “black” would prompt “hole” onto the screen.
AI improves people’s healthStephen Hawking’s experience with such a basic form of AI illustrates how non-superhuman AI can indeed change people’s lives for the better. Speech prediction helped him cope with a devastatingneurological disease. Other AI-based systems are already helping prevent, fight and lessen the burden of disease.
For instance, AI can analyze medical sensors and other health data to predict how likely a patient is todevelop a severe blood infection. In studies it wassubstantially more accurate– and provided much more advance warning – than other methods.
Another group of researchers created an AI program to sift through electronic health records of 700,000 patients. The program, called “Deep Patient,” unearthed linkages that had not been apparent to doctors, identifying new risk patterns for certain cancers, diabetes and psychiatric disorders.
AI has even powered a robotic surgery system thatoutperformed human surgeonsin a procedure on pigs that’s very similar to one type of operation on human patients.
There’s so much promise for AI to improve people’s health that collecting medical data has become a cornerstone of both software development and public-health policy in the U.S. For example, the Obama White Houselaunched a research effortseeking tocollect DNA from at least a million Americans. The data will be made available for AI systems to analyze when studyingnew medical treatments, potentially improving both diagnoses and patients’ recovery.
All of these benefits from AI are available right now, and more are in the works. They do suggest that superhuman AI systems could be extremely powerful, but despite warnings from Hawking and fellow technology visionaryElon Muskthat day may never come. In the meantime, as Hawking knew, there ismuch to be gained. AI gave him a better and more efficient voice than his body was able to provide, with which he called for both research and restraint.
Want to write?Write an article and join a growing community of more than 146,400 academics and researchers from 4,377 institutions.
Register nowCopyright © 2010–2022,The Conversation US, Inc.
