old id = 3771
Leadership in a Digital Age - Singularity Spark
unknown
https://platform.su.org/playlist/leadership-in-a-digital-age/2201

In times of uncertainty and change, employees look at their leaders to help guide them and their organizations.
A comprehensive understanding of the environment that impacts the conditions of leadership will guide leaders through times of change. To thrive, as a leader and as a business, we must reinvent what innovation looks like, what foundations we build our organizations on, what digital strategies to adhere to, and understand the paradigms within which we make our decisions.
Learning Objective:Investigate the internal and external contextual shifts leaders and innovators must navigateFocus:Deepen understanding of how to implement organizational change that sticksDon't miss the Discussion Guides attached to the Closing Video.
Pre-ReadingHow Leaders Can Make Innovation Everyone’s Day Job By Lisa Kay SolomonHow to Make an Exponential Business Model to 10X Growth By Lisa Kay SolomonInside a $1 Billion Real Estate Company Operating Entirely in VR By Aaron FrankEstonia Is a ‘Digital Republic’—What That Means and Why It May Be Everyone’s FutureAI Will Create Millions More Jobs Than It Will Destroy. Here’s How By Byron Reese“Why an Age of Machine Learning Needs the Humanities” By Ted Underwood, Angela Saini, InferiorSuggested Books:Where the Action IsLeadership in a Digital AgeTotal Duration:2:37:04Videos:9What makes good leaders isn’t stable through the years. As culture and context change, leadership likewise needs to adapt. This learning path will investigate a number of notable shifts in the business world and present strategies and tools to implement true change that sticks.
A new breed of company—the exponential organization (ExO)—is using information technologies to rapidly scale and accelerate growth. ExO’s use tools like crowdsourcing and community, big data and algorithms, and decentralized organizational structures to achieve performance benchmarks at an order of magnitude better than their peers.
Leaders and policymakers around the world are questioning how to best guide their societies in a world of rapid technological change. While it may seem the world is becoming more and more unpredictable, this is not necessarily the case – it is simply operating by a new set of rules. In fact, those who understand the new rules are doing really well.
"Contextual, Procedural and Behavioral Determinants of Innovation Performance" - Osorio, C﻿“Build an innovation engine in 90 days.” Anthony, S., Duncan, D., & Siren, P. M. (2014) Harvard business review﻿“To Frame or Reframe: Where Might Design Thinking Research Go Next?”- Beckman, S. L. California Management ReviewIn a rapidly changing world, there are questions every company has to answer. Whether one’s company grows in the digital age is a function not only of execution but also new foundations. In this session, we’ll cover examples of companies building future-focused strategies and organizational layers designed to support those strategies.
One of the biggest shifts in the decision-making process is the contextual paradigm within which we frame our thinking. Information technologies and computational systems have fundamentally reshaped our modes of thinking. This session provides an overview of the contemporary computational paradigm, how our digital technologies shape our thinking, and how important their influence is in our (ethical) decision making processes.
