old id = 3772
The Shift: Reimagining Tech and Its Future - Singularity Spark
unknown
https://platform.su.org/playlist/the-shift-reimagining-tech-and-its-future/2303

Being able to shift mindset is a crucial skill for the team members of any organizationThis path is well-suited for organizations that are just starting to explore the impact of exponential technologies in the world and their industries. At a high level, sessions will look into some of themost disruptive technologies and the impact they have had on whole industries. With this path, you will create and support a mindset shift by exploring the future implications of exponential change and technological innovation for leaders, organizations, and society.
Learning Objective:Create and support a mindset shift by exploring the future implications of exponential changeFocus:Exponential technologies and mindset shiftDon't miss the Discussion Guides attached to the Closing Video.
Pre- ReadingNew Report Predicts Tech Could Fuel an Age of Freedom—or Make Civilization Collapse By Edd GentFor a Bright Future of Work, We Must Get Better at Collaborating With Machines By Peter H. Diamandis, MDWhen Did We Become Fully Human? What Fossils and DNA Tell Us About the Evolution of Modern Intelligence By Nick LongrichThe Shift: Reimagining Tech and Its FutureTotal Duration:3:12:26Videos:11Humanity has seen more progress in science and technology in the last 40 years than it has in the previous 400. The exponential pace of information technologies has driven this change. In this series we will explore some of the biggest game-changers when it comes to these quick-moving technologies and how they are shaping the world around us.
We live in a time when things once thought impossible are now not only possible, but commonplace. In this session, Dr. Morey discusses how the latest technologies are akin to magic—not because of the things they can make us do, but the barriers they can break down. Technology can unite us to solve big challenges and make the world a better place for all.
The smart cities of the future will come stock with intelligent infrastructure to anticipate and fulfill city-dwellers’ needs. But how do we get there? How do we ensure that all communities are being served? In this session, Dr. Geci Karuri-Sebina discusses the future of cities, including the potential good and bad—and what it means for us as the world becomes increasingly urban.
The smart cities of the future will come stock with intelligent infrastructure to anticipate and fulfill city-dwellers’ needs. But how do we get there? How do we ensure that all communities are being served? In this session, Dr. Geci Karuri-Sebina discusses the future of cities, including the potential good and bad—and what it means for us as the world becomes increasingly urban.
Developers are moving us toward the future depicted in ​Ready Player One​ with a new generation of immersive virtual worlds. We’re witnessing the early stages of one of the most important assets in all of computing: the augmented reality cloud (AR cloud). The AR cloud might be the most important and valuable piece of computing infrastructure—more valuable than Google’s PageRank index or Facebook’s social graph.
While some predict that the rise of artificial intelligence will mean the “end of humankind,” others see no future without algorithms and data-driven systems. What sense can we make from these predictions? This session unpacks the ways in which current computational systems impact our culture and sense of self, explore software as a metaphor for our humanity, and challenge existing ideas about what it means to be human in the digital age.
