old id = 3971
ISTA  | Information about Region
unknown
https://ist.ac.at/en/campus/information-about-region

DE/ ENRegionThe historic city of Klosterneuburg is known for its high standard of living.
Information about RegionOn this site:KlosterneuburgInstitute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA) is located in Klosterneuburg, a historic city northwest of Vienna. The campus is located in the middle of the beautiful Vienna Woods (Wienerwald), only 18 kilometers from Vienna’s city center.
The city of Klosterneuburg is known for its high standard of living. It is situated between the Danube and the hilly Vienna Woods’ landscape with vineyards, pastures and forests and thus offers an excellent living environment. The city provides all services in the fields of education, medicine, social affairs and culture at an exceptionally high level.
A large monastery, which was redesigned in the 18thcentury in magnificent Baroque style for the Emperor of Austria, characterizes the city center. The neighboring Museum Gugging is both an exhibition house for the Gugging artists and a forum for international Art Brut.
Further information aboutKlosterneuburg.
ViennaLiving in ViennaCovering an area of 415 km², the city of Vienna stretches from the foothills of the Vienna Woods (Wienerwald) in the west and the Danube in the north, to the edge of the Marchfeld, the Danube meadows (Donau-Auen) and the Vienna Basin (Wiener Becken) in the east and south. Green spaces make up about half of the city’s area.
Vienna has about 2,000 green spaces. There are 280 parks and gardens that enrich the cityscape. In spring, 400 varieties of roses bloom in the Volksgarten alone. The local recreation areas Prater, Vienna Woods, and Lobau invite people to walks, excursions, hikes, and bike tours.
Highest quality of living in Austria’s capitalVienna is an international and multicultural city, offering a very high standard of living. The latest study (published in 2019) of the consulting firm Mercer showed that Vienna has the world’s highest quality of life for the 10th year running. This is the result of a global comparative study of 231 major cities. Mercer analyzes 39 criteria, which play a central role in an expatriate’s point of view, to assess the quality of life in each city. These criteria include political, social, economic and environmental aspects, as well as health and education factors.
Vienna headquarters many global companies and international organizations (such as the United Nations and its organizations the IAEO, UNHCR, UNIDO, and many more), which means there is a large, well-organized expatriate community. In addition, there are several international schools, international networks and attractive high-quality cultural offerings which is one reason why Vienna is very popular among expatriates.
Infrastructure in and around ViennaTrain:Wien Hauptbahnhof(The Vienna Main Station) is the most modern and most important national and international transport station in Austria. In addition to coaches and commuter trains, all long-distance trains of theÖBB(Austrian Federal Railways) stop here.
ÖBBoffers direct train connections to Wels, Linz, St. Pölten, and also stops in Wien Meidling.
Wien Hauptbahnhofis also connected to the Vienna public transport system by the subway line U1, trams and busesWien Westbahnhof(The Vienna West Train Station), is the terminus of all Regional Express trains and theWestbahn(Western Railway). Additionally, the Vienna Airport Lines airport bus, which runs at 30-minute intervals, stops in front of the station at Europaplatz.
Airplane:Vienna International Airport is located east of the city center and can be easily reached by public transport. Vienna Airport Line buses take you directly to the Vienna city center, the Donauzentrum (a shopping area) or theWestbahnhofrailway station. The City Airport Train (CAT) shuttles passengers between the airport and Wien Mitte Station (U3, U4 subway connections) in 16 minutes. The S7 express railway runs between the airport and Floridsdorf, and the journey takes 37 minutes.
Local traffic:Wiener Linien, the public transport authority of Vienna, satisfies all mobility needs with a total of 161 subway, tram and bus lines that take locals and visitors quickly from A to B in short intervals. The subways run daily from approximately 5:00 am to midnight while trams and buses usually stop earlier. On Fridays, Saturdays and before public holidays, the subways run continuously, and there are additional night buses at these times.
Tickets are available in the Wiener Linien Online-Shop, via the Wiener Linien Ticket-App, at ticket machines aand at most VienneseTabak Trafik(tobacconists).
More information on ticket types and prices can be foundhere.
Further information on notableeventsin Vienna.
Subscribe to the ISTA NewsletterFOLLOW US
