old id = 3999
Khashoggi's death is forcing UK tech to reckon with its Saudi links | WIRED UK
unknown
https://www.wired.co.uk/article/saudi-arabia-khashoggi-murder-tech-conference

We may earn a commission if you buy something from any affiliate links on our site.
Learn more.
Chris Stokel-WalkerKhashoggi's death is forcing UK tech to reckon with its Saudi linksThousands attended Saudi Arabia’s inaugural crown jewel investment conference, the Future Investment Initiative – better known as Davos in the Desert – a year ago this week. Nearly 4,000 packed the King Abdul Aziz International Conference Centre and the Ritz-Carlton in Riyadh to learn about artificial intelligence, robotics and investment.
It was a must-visit for the great and good of European and UK tech, eager to woo the newly-outward looking (and tech favouring) kingdom. The potential spoils? Investment, and shedloads of it. Saudi investment in Britainis worth £65 billion, according to a speech given by then-foreign secretary Boris Johnson. The kingdom has a stake in atech accelerator based in Mayfair, in the heart of London, seeking shares in the capital’s hottest startups and ventures.
But after the death of Jamal Khashoggi at the Saudi Arabian consulate in Istanbul this year’s conference will look a little different. After nearly three weeks of denials Saudi officials finally claimed that Khashoggi’s death was an accident, but overwhelming evidence, including the purporteduse of a body doublewearing the slain journalist’s clothes to make it seem like he left the consulate alive, seems to suggest that Khashoggi was murdered.
As the doors of the conference halls swing open on Tuesday, October 23, the halls will be a little roomier, and there’ll be less jostling for seats. Massive public backlash and concerted campaigns to question those listed as attending the conference after the death of Khashoggi means many representatives – including some representing tech companies from the UK and Europe – have decided not to board their flights to Saudi Arabia.
Among them is Päivi Haikkola, the ecosystem lead at DIMECC, a Helsinki-based startup network. On 13 October, Haikkola pulled out of the conference after discussing it with her employers. “We felt that not participating is a more responsible act than participating,” she says. She’s emblematic of those who have been willing to make a stand in light of recent events.
Tuesday's conference was meant to be a major moment for Saudi Arabia: a demonstration of Saudi soft power, bringing some of the biggest names from the worlds of technology and business to Jeddah. "The conference is key for Saudi Arabia because it is looking to attract foreign business to the kingdom to diversify its economy," says Ellen R. Wald, president of Transversal Consulting and author of the bookSaudi, Inc.
It was supposed to be a shop window for the kingdom's Public Investment Fund (PIF), a sovereign wealth fund launched concurrently with the previous Future Investment Initiative conference that the Saudi state says “acts as a roadmap for the next three years to strengthen PIF’s position as the engine behind economic diversification in the kingdom and role in transforming Saudi Arabia into a global investment powerhouse.”It’s the state’s public face of investment, and according to those in the know, an eager, cash-rich investor. "The Saudi PIF is also very keen to invest in startups and has the resources to make significant investments either on its own or through the SoftBank Vision Fund," explains Wald.
The PIF has already contributed 45 per cent of Japan’s $100 billion SoftBank technology-focused venture capital fund and taken big, billion-dollar-plus stakes in Uber, Tesla and Richard Branson’s Virgin Space companies. “They’re creating a huge sovereign wealth fund and these are their initial investments. It’s risky and not typical, but that’s their plan,” Wald says. In the wake of Khashoggi's death, Bransonreleased a statementsaying he had suspended proposed investment from the Public Investment Fund in his two space companies Virgin Galactic and Virgin Orbit.
While the kingdom is trying to assure its future solvency by replacing petro dollars with returns on tech investments, it's by no means poor - which is precisely why, despite high profile withdrawals from the event, some firms are still making their way to Jeddah. "Tech companies may be hesitant to skip the conference entirely because Saudi Arabia has a lot of money it’s looking to invest when it partners with companies," says Wald. "There is a lot of potential opportunity that companies may be hesitant to miss out on."WIRED UK contacted nine different people (or their press departments) listed as speakers or participants at the Future Investment Initiative event. Three replied, while the others ignored repeated requests for comment via work and personal email addresses and social media accounts.
Among those who ducked questions include Mark Jackson, tasked with business development at Cambridge Quantum Computing Limited, a spinout from Cambridge University. Three messages sent over the course of four days to the only email address listed on their website were not acknowledged. Joe Kaeser, chief executive of German technology giant Siemens, was also due to speak at the conference, but backed out the day before the event, explaining his reasoningin a lengthy LinkedIn post.
Read more:As Turkey went to the polls, a global network was mapping online censorship in real-timeHerman Narula, co-founder and chief executive of London based games technology company Improbable, did not reply to a tweet sent to his profile and an email to his unique work email address. Simon Segars, the Essex-born chief executive of ARM Holdings, a Cambridge-based semiconductor firm listed as a speaker on the Future Investment Initiative website, did not reply to an email sent to his personal work address.
Antonio Simeone, the Italian founder of artificial intelligence-powered British financial startup Euklid, acknowledged he was in Riyadh for the conference, and a spokesperson later followed up confirming the firm's attendance.
"As Italians, we were inspired by the actions of St Francis during the Fifth Crusade," the emailed statement reads. "We believe that it is a clear example of how keeping the dialogue open can lead to favourable results in periods of tensions between different countries and cultures. With this same spirit of openness and dialogue we base our vision of the future of the financial industry, which is an important aspect at Euklid."A spokesperson for PwC UK passed on a request for comment as to why Ammar Hindash, a PwC employee, was attending the conference, to its Saudi Arabia office, who did not respond before publication.
Some did respond, indicating why they were uncomfortable participating in the event after the death of Jamal Khashoggi. The City of London Corporation – the government agency that oversees London’s financial hub – had planned to send a delegation, led by Catherine McGuinness, the corporation’s policy and resources chairman, to Riyadh, to discuss asset management and financial services.
“The UK government asked the City of London Corporation to be part of efforts to develop a long-term partnership with Saudi Arabia,” says a City of London Corporation spokesperson. “However, ahead of this conference we want to make clear our deep concern at the disappearance of Jamal Khashoggi. “We support the UK government’s call for the Saudi authorities to cooperate fully with investigators to deliver a clear and credible answer to the question of what happened,” the spokesperson continued. “We will be raising these concerns with our Saudi counterparts. In the light of these developments the Policy Chairman will now not be attending the FII conference.”Others seemingly found convenient excuses not to go. Ralf Reichert, the Cologne-based global president and chief executive of the Electronic Sports League (ESL), an e-sports championship body, was listed as a speaker at the conference before the organisers deleted it from the website. (Archived copies are still available.)According to a spokesperson for ESL, the conference organisers changed Reichert’s timeslot to speak so he is no longer able to attend the event. The spokesperson did not respond to follow-up questions about what prior booking Reichert had that clashed with the rearranged slot, or whether he would still have attended had the timeslot not been changed.
By the time the conference gets underway, those taking their seats in Riyadh will have had 21 days to digest the overwhelming and increasingly irrefutable body of evidence that indicates Jamal Khashoggi was murdered at the beginning of this month in Istanbul.
Having shown a willingness to invest – and invest big – in tech companies,the kingdom of Saudi Arabia has become another would-be funder to be courted – and one with deep pockets, too. The decision to put heart before head, to protest rather than protect the financial future of your company, is a difficult one. But in the fullness of time, some European and British tech representatives may realise they’ve made the wrong choice.
– These photos show thedevastating impact of human progress– How to hack your brain toremember anything– The race is onsave the banana from extinctionagain– How the mods of r/funnyweed out Russian trolls– The untold story of Stripethe $20 billion payments startupDon’t miss out.
Sign-up to WIRED Weekenderto get the best of WIRED in your inbox every weekend© Condé Nast Britain 2022.
