old id = 4181
In situ single-atom array synthesis using dynamic holographic optical tweezers - PMC
unknown
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5095563

The new PMC design is here!Learn moreabout navigating our updated article layout. ThePMC legacy viewwill also be available for a limited time.
An official website of the United States governmentThe .gov means it’s official.
Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site.
The site is secure.
Thehttps://ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely.
AccountOther FormatsActionsShareRESOURCESIn situsingle-atom array synthesis using dynamic holographic optical tweezersHyosub Kim1Department of Physics, KAIST, Daejeon 305-701, KoreaWoojun Lee1Department of Physics, KAIST, Daejeon 305-701, KoreaHan-gyeol Lee1Department of Physics, KAIST, Daejeon 305-701, KoreaHanlae Jo1Department of Physics, KAIST, Daejeon 305-701, KoreaYunheung Song1Department of Physics, KAIST, Daejeon 305-701, KoreaJaewook Ahn1Department of Physics, KAIST, Daejeon 305-701, KoreaAssociated DataThe data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon request.
AbstractEstablishing a reliable method to form scalable neutral-atom platforms is an essential cornerstone for quantum computation, quantum simulation and quantum many-body physics. Here we demonstrate a real-time transport of single atoms using holographic microtraps controlled by a liquid-crystal spatial light modulator. For this, an analytical design approach to flicker-free microtrap movement is devised and cold rubidium atoms are simultaneously rearranged with 2Nmotional degrees of freedom, representing unprecedented space controllability. We also accomplish anin situfeedback control for single-atom rearrangements with the high success rate of 99% for up to 10 μm translation. We hope this proof-of-principle demonstration of high-fidelity atom-array preparations will be useful for deterministic loading ofNsingle atoms, especially on arbitrary lattice locations, and also for real-time qubit shuttling in high-dimensional quantum computing architectures.
Laser cooling and trapping of atoms has enabled the construction and manipulation of quantum systems at the single-atom level1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9. To create scalable and highly controllable quantum systems, for example, a large-scale quantum information machine, further development of this bottom-up approach is necessary. The implementation of these systems has crucial prerequisites: scalability; site distinguishability; and reliable single-atom loading onto sites. The previously considered methods10,11,12,13satisfy the two former conditions relatively well; however, the last condition, loading single atoms onto individual sites, relies mostly on probabilistic loading, implying that loading a predefined set of atoms at given positions will be hampered exponentially. Two approaches are readily thinkable to overcome this issue: increasing the single-atom loading efficiency14,15,16,17and relocating abundant atoms to unfilled positions18,19. Realizing the atom relocation idea, in particular, is directly related to how many atoms can be transportable independently and simultaneously.
In this regard, using holographic optical tweezers is advantageous because arbitrary potentials can be designed for atoms6,12. The optical tweezers are the image determined by the wave propagation integral, for example, Fourier transformation, so the hologram for a complex potential can be designed using a numerical method often based on iterative Fourier transformation algorithms (IFTAs)12. When being used in conjunction with an active holographic device such as spatial light modulators (SLM), the algorithms can produce dynamic optical potentials, of which the many applications include dynamicin situatom manipulation20,21,22,23, quantum logic gate24, pattern formations in an addressable optical lattice19and real-time feedback transportation of atoms7. However, there has been no scheme implemented for the rearrangement of many atoms, with the full degree of control (2NforNatoms) in two-dimensional (2D) space.
In this paper, we demonstrate a dynamic holographic single-atom tweezer with unprecedented degrees of freedom of 2N. In a proof-of-principle experiment conducted with cold87Rb atoms, simultaneous rearrangements of up toN=9 single atoms were successfully performed. This method may be further applicable to deterministicNsingle-atom loading, coherent transport20,21and controlled collisions22,23.
ResultsExperimental concept and flicker-free beam steering algorithmFigure 1shows the concept of our experiment and the first demonstration ofNsingle-atom transport with 2Nmotional degrees of freedom. The setup consists of an active holographic device (liquid-crystal SLM (LC-SLM)), an imaging system and a cold87Rb atom chamber, as shown inFig. 1a. When the holograms were transferred by a two-lens system to the entrance pupil of a high numerical aperture (NA=0.5) lens12, the optical tweezers had a beam radius ofwo=1.14 μm and the trap frequencies were measured asfr=100 kHz andfz=17 kHz for radial and axial directions, respectively25. The temperature of the trapped atoms was measured asT=110(10) μK using the release and recapture method26, where the error was the 1σband of each optical tweezer.
(a) The optical system for hologram transfer and trap imaging. (b) Schematic representation of 2D phase planes of the LC-SLM on the grey scale. One of them intuitively illustrates the working principle (arc division), and the other shows real hologram (random division), respectively. (c) An example of loaded single atoms in a tweezer array, represented with 22 × 22 μm2size 500 cumulative images. The parenthesis denotes the loading probability and lifetime. (d) The intensity standard deviation as a function ofNtfor the random division. The data points were calculated for various beam waistsWat the SLM window (circles forW=1 mm, squares for 2 mm, crosses for 3 mm and diamonds for 4 mm) and the solid lines are the linear fits to the data. The inset presents the intensity histogram ofW=2 mm forNt=9 of the red mark. (e) Anin situsingle-atom array expansion movie.
Schematic examples of our trap generation algorithm are represented inFig. 1b. Our algorithm uses the simplest analytic form of beam steering, that is, the linear phaseϕ(x)=kxx. This phase modulation directly couples the modulation plane (Fourier domain) control parameter,kx, to the image plane position,X=Fkx/k, with one-to-one correspondence, whereFis the lens focal length andkis the wave-vector of the trap light. Then, the given function becomes a flicker-free solution, because a linear combination of two phases,αk1x+(1−α)k2xwithα∈[0, 1], is again a linear phase which smoothly sweeps the two focal points,X1=Fk1/kandX2=Fk2/k(see Methods for more details). To obtain more than a single optical tweezer, the modulation plane is divided into several sub-planes as inFig. 1b27. When each sub-plane is assigned to each linear phase and the division is randomized in the single-pixel resolution of the device, this method effectively preserves the diffraction limit of the individual optical tweezers focused onto the image plane. Note that the required trap laser power in this manner scales with, whereNtis the number of optical tweezers; hence, it is inefficient compared with the IFTA, which scales withNtbecause the IFTA coherently sums over the entire modulation plane for every tweezer. Nevertheless, the proposed algorithm concedes power efficiency for independent controllability.
Simultaneous transport ofNsingle atomsAn image accumulating 500 snapshots from different loading events is shown inFig. 1c. The three-dimensional (3D) molasses continuous imaging10,28captured a snapshot every 60 ms with 50 ms exposure time, where the single-event atom visibility exceeded 99.99%. IfNtincrease, the number of SLM pixels per single optical tweezer would decrease, thus degrading the optical tweezer shape and intensity regularity. InFig. 1d, the deviation of the normalized peak intensityδ(theyaxis) is given proportional to the number of tweezersNt(thexaxis) and inversely proportional to the beam waistW, that is,δ∝(Nt−1)/W. This behaviour can be understood as following: the peak intensity of each tweezer follows the binomial distributionB(M, 1/Nt), where 1/Ntis the success probability andM≈W2is the number of active SLM pixels, so the normalized variance is given by, where the mean and variance areμ=M/Ntandσ2=M(Nt−1)/, respectively. In addition, there areevents that equally contribute to this normalized variance, so we getδ∝(Nt−1)/∝(Nt−1)/W. To maintain an acceptable quality of the optical tweezers for the experiments, we choseN=9 andW=2 mm (the beam waist), limited by the laser power and relay optics dimensions, respectively. In our experiment, the standard deviation of the normalized peak intensity below 0.02 is tested, and a setup with a bigger laser power would support more optical tweezers. Note that, because of thepower-scaling, diffused light will eventually wash out the tweezer potential and the maximally available tweezers in our method is estimated to be=100.
Figure 1eshows an array-rearrangement demonstration. The series of images each accumulating also 500 snapshots of the individual experiments demonstrates that the initially prepared a 3-by-3 square array of single atoms with a spacing ofd=4.5 μm expands to an array of twice the lattice spacing of 2d.
Figure 2shows a single-atom transport example; in this case,Nsingle atoms are moved from an initial array along a predefined path. Because each atom moves in 2D with parameters (Xi,Yi) fori=1 toN=9, the total degrees of freedom of movement is 2N=18.
(a) Transient cumulative images of 500 snapshots showing that nine atoms move the predefined path (red arrows) sequentially. (b) Three selected single events having four atoms or more. Every snapshot represents the same 26 × 26 μm2area. The images are Gaussian-filtered for clarity.
Single-atom array synthesis demonstrationA proof-of-principle demonstration of thein situsingle-atom array synthesis is presented inFig. 3. In a three-step feedback loop of initial atom loading inNinit=9 sites, readout, and rearrangement, as shown inFig. 3a, an atom array ofNfinal=1, 2, 3 or 4, is produced. After the atoms are initially loaded at the sites, the first computer checks the occupancy of each site by reading out the electron multiplying charge-coupled device (CCD) images. A 9-bit binary information that represents the occupancy is then sent to the second computer, which has a look-up table of atom rearrangement trajectories, each stored in DRAM as a sequence of 30 holograms, between all possible initial and final pairs of atom arrays. It takes 0.6 s from the readout to the retrieval of an appropriate trajectory (note that, using a fast graphic-processing unit can greatly reduce this time and also make the look-up table unnecessary29). Then, the second computer sequentially loads the holograms to the SLM at a speed of 30 frame-per-second to move the atoms along the trajectory. The initial, and four types of final cumulative images are represented by the atom number histograms inFig. 3b,c. The individual final images are independent experiments that form one, two, three or four atom arrays out of nine.
(a) The feedback-control loop sequence: (i) signal gathering and processing with a CCD, (ii) state resolving and solution finding, (iii) solution execution with a SLM. (b) The cumulative image of initially loadedN=9 atoms (left), accompanied by the corresponding number histogram (right), where the scale bar size is 5 μm. (c) From the initial nine sites, one, two, three and four atoms are rearranged through single feedback loop. (d) Success probabilities of the atom rearrangement:P=0.5 (black dotted line), experiments (red line and data points) and theoretical limit (blue dashed line). The error bar depicts the standard deviation of time-binned 100 events.
Compared with the binomial distribution of the initial histogram, the final histogram inFig. 3dhas non-Poissonian distribution. The loading efficiency curves of the final arrays are presented with red points for the data from the number histograms of at least 500 events. The black dotted line follows 0.5N, which is the loading efficiency in the collisional blockade regime, and the blue dashed line follows the cumulative binomial distribution given byand the red line iswherep=0.48 is the initial loading probability andps=0.86 is the experimental (moving) success probability from the fitting. 1−psis composed of the background collisional and moving losses. During the entire feedback process, the background collisional loss is estimated to be 0.13 and the moving loss is estimated to be 0.01. The moving success rate, as expected, has high fidelity and a deterministic transport has been reliably completed. TheNfinal=4 case exhibits sixfold enhancement in loading efficiency, compared with theP=0.5 collisional blockade regime.
DiscussionThe physics behind this demonstration is the capability of holographic optical tweezers to sustain trapped atoms while the hologram is being actively updated, but this has been considered impossible because of intensity flickering30,31. If conventional IFTAs are used to generate individual holograms to form the required optical potentials, the frame-to-frame evolution does not necessarily maintain an appropriate in-between potential (seeFig. 4a). While the intensity flickering is not an issue for macroscopic particles suspended in a solution32, microscopic particles (for example, atoms) do not wait until the missing potential recovers or cannot resist excessive displacement heating. Even with a fast device such as a digital micromirror device (50 kHz frame)33or for ultracold atoms34, a large portion of the trapped atoms is lost. The trap loss simulation (see Methods) performed as a function of the frame rate,f, of the device and the trap frequency,, supports the idea that the intensity flickering hinders the trap stability (seeFig. 4b,c). In particular, a constant loss exists because of the significant intensity flickering in the adiabatic region (fr≫f, Region 1 inFig. 4c). In the non-adiabatic region (fr<f, Region 2 inFig. 4c), single steps do not lose atoms (because the intensity flickering is fast enough); however, in this region, either the atoms boil up fast via displacement heating or current technologies are not applicable. The holographic transport of single atoms, therefore, requires an alternative algorithmic approach (this work) to reduce the intensity flickering.
(a) Stroboscopic measurement of optical images of the trap array. Two different images are generated using an IFTA and the LC-SLM. The two upper rows in the second and third frames (right) are slightly shifted up, by the gaps indicated by the arrows, from the first frame (left). (b) The transient potential for the trap loss simulation. The trap waist iswo=1.14 μm, the transient time=1/fwherefis frame rate, and the displacementwo/18. The colour scale is normalized by the peak potential,U. (c) Trap loss landscape by the flickering potential (b). The colour scale normalized byPlrepresents the loss probability at time, which varies by 0.005–0.04 according to the initial trap condition (T/U=1/18∼1/12).
The feature of the LC-SLM most strongly coupled to the intensity flicker is the finite modulation depth Φ (=2π). When a linear phase gradually changes fromk1xtok2x, as depicted inFig. 5a, certain regions (shaded) are flicker-free (because there are no phase jump), but the rest are not. An ideal flicker-free evolution could be achieved with infinitesimal change of Δk, but it would then take infinite time to transport atoms. In experiment with a finite Δk, we may quantify the intensity flicker by comparing the shaded region (denoted byRthat is the field amplitude for a tweezer, normalized to one) with the unshaded region (denoted by 1−R). When the phase evolves fromk1xtok2x, the fields from shaded region and unshaded region interfere destructively, because the unshaded region experiences Φ phase jump while the shaded region is stationary. InFig. 5b, the arrows representR(stationary) and 1−R(with a transient angleθ), respectively. Then, the peak intensity of an optical tweezer varies between 1 (the vector-sum maximum) and (2R−1)2(the minimum), so the difference between them, that quantifies the intensity flicker, is given by 4R(1−R). InFig. 5c, the survival probability change of the loaded atoms on the traps is shown. Between the two time-lapses for natural decays, the hologram movie was played to displace the optical tweezer, while snapshots were being taken in every 60 ms. Each measured atom decay curve shows the transport loss due to the intensity flicker induced by the 5 μm displacement of the optical tweezer. The sudden probability drop,ploss, is measured for eachRvalue, and, from the measurement, the single-frame loss probability,Pl=1−(1−ploss)1/n, wherenis the number of frames in each displacement, is obtained as inFig. 5d. Note that 1−Ris proportional to the displacement step, Δx. For example,R=0.96 and 0.94 correspond to Δx=180, and 270 nm, respectively. When the result is compared with the adiabatic intensity flickering model (see Methods), the measured atom temperature agrees well with the temperatures of the two theory lines, 107 and 140 μK, respectively, inFig. 5d. The agreement, therefore, supports that the dominant moving loss mechanism is the intensity flicker. Because the theory predicts that the single-frame loss can be exponentially decreased as a function ofR, the high-fidelity holographic transport is achievable: for example, when we consider an empirically defined movable region ofR>0.96, which is about 180 nm step, the fidelity after a 5 μm transport can exceed ∼0.99. Note that the deviation of data from the theory line at smallerRmay come from stray B-field and the vector light shift of the optical tweezer, both of which cause force on atoms while the molasses is being turned on. AsRis smaller, the trapped atoms are more vulnerable to the force and thus the loss has more increasing tendency.
(a) Schematic representation of modulated two linear phases. Thexaxis is normalized to 1. The sum of the shaded regions isRwhich is proportional to field strength. (b) Transient vectorial representation of the flicker effect. (c) The experimentally measured loss probabilities are shown for three different tweezer displacements Δx=180, 360 and 520 μm, respectively. Each data point (grey) is the average of 1,000 experimental runs, the red solid line is the average value of the data points, and the black dashed line is the loss without the displacement. Thexaxis is the time-lapse after the array loading, and theyaxis is the single-atom survival probability measured using 1,000 cumulative events and normalized to 1. (d) Single-frame losses measured for variousRs. The red circles are extracted single-frame data fromcand the error bars represent the standard deviations of the different sites. The solid lines are from the adiabatic intensity flicker model (see Methods for more details).
Our method can be further improved by increasing the number of atoms and the efficiency of initial loading. Besides simply increasing the number of dynamic holographic tweezers, one may use a passive diffractive optical element (DOE) in addition. A commonly available 6-by-6 passive DOE, for example, can captureN=9 atoms with a probability exceeding 99.8% atP=0.48, so subsequently an active element (SLM) can pick up and move them by taking the full advantage of ‘all' available SLM tweezers. Also, the more stable traps, such as passive DOE or acousto-optic modulators, can be used to store them for an extended time35,36. (Note that the acousto-optic modulator-based method for 2D transportation usesN1+N2diffracted beams to make an array ofN1×N2tweezers, so the moving degrees of freedom in that case is limited byN1+N2.) Furthermore, lowering the background collision can further improve the performance: in a low-pressure (10−11Torr) chamber that allowsps=0.97, the probability of creating a completely packed 3-by-3 atom array is expected to be as high as 80%.
In summary, the analytic approach to optical potential design has demonstrated the holographic transport of single-atom arrays. The systematic analysis of intensity flicker enabled the moving loss to be parameterized; thus, we could find and achieve the deterministic transport regime using a holographic method. An individual atom has its own degrees of freedom in the image plane; thus, total moving degrees of freedom of 2Nwas achieved, which demonstrates unprecedented space controllability. Furthermore, overlapping Fresnel lens pattern37can transport the array in the axial direction, suggesting that total 3Ndegrees of freedom is also possible. We also formed anin situfeedback loop for atom array rearrangement, which is a proof-of-principle demonstration of high-fidelity atom array preparation. The possible application is not limited to the deterministic array preparation but may be extended to many-body physics with arranged atoms and coherent qubit transports.
MethodsExperimentsThe active holographic device was a liquid-crystal SLM (HOLOEYE, PLUTO), a reflective phase modulator array of 1,920 × 1,080 pixels with an 8 μm2pixel size and the first-order diffraction efficiency was ∼50%. The far-off-resonant trap (FORT) beam ofPtotal=1.1 W from a Ti:sapphire continuous-wave laser (M Squared, SolsTiS) was tuned atλ=820 nm to illuminate the SLM with a beam radius ofW=2 mm in a near-orthogonal incident angle. The diffracted beam from the SLM was imaged onto the intermediate image plane by anF1=200 mm lens, and then re-imaged onto the entrance pupil of the objective lens by a second lens (doublet,F2=200 mm). The objective lens (Mitutoyo, G Plan Apo) was an infinity-corrected system, having a focal length ofF3=4 mm, a numerical aperture of NA=0.5, and a long working distance of 16 mm with 3.5 mm-thick glass-plate compensation. Then the given laser power was able to sustain up tooptical tweezers with a trap depth ofU=1.4 mK, where the diffraction efficiency wasηd=0.5, the optical system lossηs=0.5, and the optical powerPo=3.4 mW.
The cold87Rb atom chamber was a dilute vapour glass cell in a constant pressure of 3 × 10−10Torr. It had four 100 × 40 mm2clear windows with a thickness of 3.5 mm. The87Rb atoms from a getter were captured by a six-arm 3D magneto-optical trap with a beam diameter of 7.5 mm (1/e2), a detuning of −18 MHz from the 5S1/2(F=2)→5P3/2(F′=3) hyperfine transition, and dB/dz=15 G cm−1. After an initial magneto-optical trap loading operation for 2.8 s, the atom density became ∼1010cm−3(equivalent to 0.2 atoms per single trap volume), so the −46-MHz detuned 3D molasses and the FORT were overlapped for 200 ms to achieve the collisional blockade regime of theP=0.5 filling probability in every site10. After this, the magnetic-field gradient and the molasses were turned off for 100 ms to dissipate residual cold atoms and then the 3D molasses were turned back on for continuous imaging. The scattered photons were collected by the same objective lensF3and imaged onto the CCD (Andor, iXon3 897) through the lensF2with an overall efficiency ofηc=0.02. The image plane of 26 × 26 μm2was captured as a snapshot in every 60 ms. The trap lifetime was measured as 12 s, consistent with the effect of the background gas collision.
Single-atom detectionThe scattering cross-section is given byσ=σ0/[1+4(Δ/Γ)2+I/Isat], where the resonant cross-section isσ0=2.907 × 10−9cm2, the natural line width Γ=5.746 MHz, the saturation intensityIsat=1.669 mW cm−2, the detuning Δ=−100 MHz (Stark shift is considered), and the intensityI=27 mW cm−2. Each atom in an optical tweezer emits 2.87 × 105photons per second. With the overall detection efficiency of 0.02 and the exposure time of 50 ms, we collect 280 photons per atom. It corresponds to a signal-to-noise ratio >5 for the CCD. When a Gaussian noise is assumed, the theoretical discrimination probability between zero and single atom is given with 5σsignificance or 99.99995%. In the experiments, a background photon noise exists, but the histogram shows the success probability exceeding 99.99%.
Heating in optical tweezersThere are several heating sources for trapped atoms including the FORT scattering, the intensity noise, the beam pointing fluctuation; however, none of them are a significant heating source. The heating caused by the photon scattering from FORT is estimated as 7 μK s−1at the peak intensity, which is negligible in our trap. The intensity fluctuation (ΔI) and beam pointing fluctuation (Δwo) by the LC-SLM voltage update are up to 6% and 5%, respectively; its noise spectrum, however, is less than 500 Hz. The parametric heating has harmonic resonances atωr/2n38,39, which are far from 500 Hz. The quantitative heating rate has not been estimated; however, any atom loss difference is not observed during the one second transport without the molasses. Empirically the low-frequency noise does not degrade the trap capability in our 1.4 mK deep trap. Utilizing an intensity feedback control to the diffraction beam will diminish the intensity fluctuation40; thus, a lower trap depth would be achievable.
Dynamic range and resolution of the control spaceThe optical tweezers are separated from the zeroth order diffraction byX01=F1F3/F2×k1/k>5 μm to avoid the cross-talk, which sets the lower limit=5 μm of the dynamic range of the control space. The upper limit is empirically given by=45 μm, because the diffraction efficiency decreases ask1increases. Note that the entrance pupil diameter of the objective lens is D∼2NAF3and the initial beam diameter 2W=4 mm at the SLM is (de)magnified by the ratioF2/F1=1 to fit withDfor optimal performance, which results inX01=D/2NA×k1/k, independent of the focal lengths of the system. In our experiment, a safe working area of 26 × 26 μm2is used for the optical tweezer patterns and the imaging plane. The discrete phase induces a beam steering error41but the amount of the error is only 4 nm in our system with 256 grey levels. Thus the resolution is limited by 4 nm, which is much smaller than the long term drift (100 nm) and the LC-SLM refresh fluctuation (100 nm).
Adiabatic intensity flicker modelThe probability for an atom initially trapped in a potentialUto escape from an adiabatically lowered potentialU′ is approximately given bywhereis the temperature of the Boltzman distribution26. In our experiment, the lowest trap potential is given byU′=(2R−1)2U. The solid lines inFig. 5dare the numerically obtained results ofequation (3)forT=U/13 andT=U/10, respectively.
Intensity flicker estimationThe finite modulation depth (0≤ϕ≤Φ) of the SLM phase restricts the ideal linear phase to a modulated phase in a sawtooth shape. We consider two SLM phasesϕ1(x)=mod(k1x+Φ/2, Φ) andϕ2(x)=mod(k2x+Φ/2, Φ), where Φ∈2πN,x∈[−D/2,D/2],D=4.6 mm is the size of the active SLM window, and we assumek1≤k2without loss of generality. The phase evolution fromϕ1(x) toϕ2(x) is then given by, whereN1,2(x)=[k1,2x/Φ] is a function defined with the Gauss' symbol [x]=x−mod(x) anddenotes the response time. The conditionN1(x)=N2(x) defines the flicker-free evolution regions (the shaded regions inFig. 5a). In our experiment, the flicker-free regions are divided into two regions respectively satisfyingN1(x)=N2(x) andN1(x)=N2(x)−1, becauseRis large enough for an atom transport or (k2−k1)(D/2)<2Φ. As a result,Rdefined by the sum of the flicker-free regions divided byD/2 is given byfor the case ofN1(D/2)=N2(D/2)≡andfor the case ofN1(D/2)=N2(D/2). TheRinequation (4)can be further simplified tounder the assumptionN1=N2≈k2D/2/Φ. The obtained analytic result for theRis within 2% difference from the actual numerical value estimated by considering the circular active SLM window, the Gaussian beam profile of the optical tweezers, the 2D nature of thek1 andk2, and the discrete pixel size of the SLM. Within the experimental variation ofk1 andk2,Rvaries from 0.86 to 0.96 as shown inFig. 5d.
Single-frame displacement limitThe maximum single-frame displacement ΔX01=Δkis also given as a function ofR. Whenequation (6)is expressed withk2D=2kNAX01and 1−k1/k2=ΔX01/X01, we obtainso the single-frame displacement is proportional to 1−R.
The trap loss simulation inFig. 4b,cFor a pair of initial and final trap potentials, which haveNtrap sites, two phase holograms are calculated using Gerschberg–Saxton algorithm, respectively. Some of the sites in the initial trap potential are separated by 1/18wofrom the final trap potential. The in-between holograms are constructed byϕ1e−t/τ+ϕ2(1−e−t/τ), which generate the transient behaviour of a single trap potential as shown inFig. 4b. Then, the trajectories (p,q) of the 1D classical Hamiltonian equation of motion calculated by the symplectic Euler method are used to estimate the trap loss probability inFig. 4c, where we use a loss criteria of |q(t)|>2.5woand the initial energy and positions are sampled using the Monte-Carlo method.
Data availabilityThe data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon request.
Additional informationHow to cite this article:Kim, H.
et al.
In situsingle-atom array synthesis using dynamic holographic optical tweezers.
Nat. Commun.
7,13317 doi: 10.1038/ncomms13317 (2016).
Publisher's note:Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
AcknowledgmentsThis research was supported by the Samsung Science and Technology Foundation [SSTF-BA1301-12]. The construction of the cold atom apparatus was in part supported by the Basic Science Research Program [2013R1A2A2A05005187] through the National Research Foundation of Korea.
FootnotesAuthor contributionsH.K., W.L. and J.A. conceived the research and designed the experiment. H.K., H.-g.L., Y.S. and H.J. constructed the experimental apparatus. H.K. and W.L. performed most of the experiments and the data analysis, with guidance and theoretical support from J.A. All authors contributed to the writing of the manuscript.
ReferencesOther FormatsActionsShareRESOURCESConnect with NLMNational Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894Web PoliciesFOIAHHS Vulnerability DisclosureHelpAccessibilityCareers
