old id = 151
Natural language processing - Wikipedia
unknown
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_language_processing

Natural language processingNatural language processing(NLP) is a subfield oflinguistics,computer science, andartificial intelligenceconcerned with the interactions between computers and human language, in particular how to program computers to process and analyze large amounts ofnatural languagedata. The goal is a computer capable of "understanding" the contents of documents, including the contextual nuances of the language within them. The technology can then accurately extract information and insights contained in the documents as well as categorize and organize the documents themselves.
Challenges in natural language processing frequently involvespeech recognition,natural-language understanding, andnatural-language generation.
ContentsHistory[edit]Natural language processing has its roots in the 1950s. Already in 1950,Alan Turingpublished an article titled "Computing Machinery and Intelligence" which proposed what is now called theTuring testas a criterion of intelligence, though at the time that was not articulated as a problem separate from artificial intelligence. The proposed test includes a task that involves the automated interpretation and generation of natural language.
Symbolic NLP (1950s – early 1990s)[edit]The premise of symbolic NLP is well-summarized byJohn Searle'sChinese roomexperiment: Given a collection of rules (e.g., a Chinese phrasebook, with questions and matching answers), the computer emulates natural language understanding (or other NLP tasks) by applying those rules to the data it confronts.
Statistical NLP (1990s–2010s)[edit]Up to the 1980s, most natural language processing systems were based on complex sets of hand-written rules. Starting in the late 1980s, however, there was a revolution in natural language processing with the introduction ofmachine learningalgorithms for language processing. This was due to both the steady increase in computational power (seeMoore's law) and the gradual lessening of the dominance ofChomskyantheories of linguistics (e.g.
transformational grammar), whose theoretical underpinnings discouraged the sort ofcorpus linguisticsthat underlies the machine-learning approach to language processing.
[6]Neural NLP (present)[edit]In the 2010s,representation learninganddeep neural network-style machine learning methods became widespread in natural language processing. That popularity was due partly to a flurry of results showing that such techniques[7][8]can achieve state-of-the-art results in many natural language tasks, e.g., inlanguage modeling[9]and parsing.
[10][11]This is increasingly important inmedicineandhealthcare, where NLP helps analyze notes and text inelectronic health recordsthat would otherwise be inaccessible for study when seeking to improve care.
[12]Methods: Rules, statistics, neural networks[edit]In the early days, many language-processing systems were designed by symbolic methods, i.e., the hand-coding of a set of rules, coupled with a dictionary lookup:[13][14]such as by writing grammars or devising heuristic rules forstemming.
More recent systems based onmachine-learningalgorithms have many advantages over hand-produced rules:Despite the popularity of machine learning in NLP research, symbolic methods are still (2020) commonly used:Statistical methods[edit]Since the so-called "statistical revolution"[15][16]in the late 1980s and mid-1990s, much natural language processing research has relied heavily on machine learning. The machine-learning paradigm calls instead for usingstatistical inferenceto automatically learn such rules through the analysis of largecorpora(the plural form ofcorpus, is a set of documents, possibly with human or computer annotations) of typical real-world examples.
Many different classes of machine-learning algorithms have been applied to natural-language-processing tasks. These algorithms take as input a large set of "features" that are generated from the input data. Increasingly, however, research has focused onstatistical models, which make soft,probabilisticdecisions based on attachingreal-valuedweights to each input feature (complex-valuedembeddings,[17]and neural networks in general have also been proposed, for e.g. speech[18]). Such models have the advantage that they can express the relative certainty of many different possible answers rather than only one, producing more reliable results when such a model is included as a component of a larger system.
Some of the earliest-used machine learning algorithms, such asdecision trees, produced systems of hard if-then rules similar to existing hand-written rules. However,part-of-speech taggingintroduced the use ofhidden Markov modelsto natural language processing, and increasingly, research has focused onstatistical models, which make soft,probabilisticdecisions based on attachingreal-valuedweights to the features making up the input data. Thecache language modelsupon which manyspeech recognitionsystems now rely are examples of such statistical models. Such models are generally more robust when given unfamiliar input, especially input that contains errors (as is very common for real-world data), and produce more reliable results when integrated into a larger system comprising multiple subtasks.
Since the neural turn, statistical methods in NLP research have been largely replaced by neural networks. However, they continue to be relevant for contexts in which statistical interpretability and transparency is required.
Neural networks[edit]A major drawback of statistical methods is that they require elaborate feature engineering. Since 2015,[19]the field has thus largely abandoned statistical methods and shifted toneural networksfor machine learning. Popular techniques include the use ofword embeddingsto capture semantic properties of words, and an increase in end-to-end learning of a higher-level task (e.g., question answering) instead of relying on a pipeline of separate intermediate tasks (e.g., part-of-speech tagging and dependency parsing). In some areas, this shift has entailed substantial changes in how NLP systems are designed, such that deep neural network-based approaches may be viewed as a new paradigm distinct from statistical natural language processing. For instance, the termneural machine translation(NMT) emphasizes the fact that deep learning-based approaches to machine translation directly learnsequence-to-sequencetransformations, obviating the need for intermediate steps such as word alignment and language modeling that was used instatistical machine translation(SMT).
Common NLP tasks[edit]The following is a list of some of the most commonly researched tasks in natural language processing. Some of these tasks have direct real-world applications, while others more commonly serve as subtasks that are used to aid in solving larger tasks.
Though natural language processing tasks are closely intertwined, they can be subdivided into categories for convenience. A coarse division is given below.
Text and speech processing[edit]Morphological analysis[edit]Syntactic analysis[edit]Lexical semantics (of individual words in context)[edit]Relational semantics (semantics of individual sentences)[edit]Discourse (semantics beyond individual sentences)[edit]Higher-level NLP applications[edit]General tendencies and (possible) future directions[edit]Based on long-standing trends in the field, it is possible to extrapolate future directions of NLP. As of 2020, three trends among the topics of the long-standing series of CoNLL Shared Tasks can be observed:[35]Cognition and NLP[edit]Most higher-level NLP applications involve aspects that emulate intelligent behaviour and apparent comprehension of natural language. More broadly speaking, the technical operationalization of increasingly advanced aspects of cognitive behaviour represents one of the developmental trajectories of NLP (see trends among CoNLL shared tasks above).
Cognitionrefers to "the mental action or process of acquiring knowledge and understanding through thought, experience, and the senses."[36]Cognitive scienceis the interdisciplinary, scientific study of the mind and its processes.
[37]Cognitive linguisticsis an interdisciplinary branch of linguistics, combining knowledge and research from both psychology and linguistics.
[38]Especially during the age ofsymbolic NLP, the area of computational linguistics maintained strong ties with cognitive studies.
As an example,George Lakoffoffers a methodology to build natural language processing (NLP) algorithms through the perspective ofcognitive science, along with the findings ofcognitive linguistics,[39]with two defining aspects:Ties with cognitive linguistics are part of the historical heritage of NLP, but they have been less frequently addressed since the statistical turn during the 1990s. Nevertheless, approaches to develop cognitive models towards technically operationalizable frameworks have been pursued in the context of various frameworks, e.g., of cognitive grammar,[41]functional grammar,[42]construction grammar,[43]computational psycholinguistics and cognitive neuroscience (e.g.,ACT-R), however, with limited uptake in mainstream NLP (as measured by presence on major conferences[44]of theACL). More recently, ideas of cognitive NLP have been revived as an approach to achieveexplainability, e.g., under the notion of "cognitive AI".
[45]Likewise, ideas of cognitive NLP are inherent to neural models multimodal NLP (although rarely made explicit).
[46]See also[edit]References[edit]Further reading[edit]External links[edit]Navigation menuSearch
