old id = 4890
Information for Authors
unknown
https://www.acm.org/publications/authors/information-for-authors

About ACMACM, the world's largest educational and scientific computing society, delivers resources that advance computing as a science and a profession. ACM provides the computing field's premier Digital Library and serves its members and the computing profession with leading-edge publications, conferences, and career resources.
[Learn More about ACM...]ACM MembershipACM offers the resources, access and tools to invent the future. No one has a larger global network of professional peers. No one has more exclusive content. No one presents more forward-looking events. Or confers more prestigious awards. Or provides a more comprehensive learning center.
[Learn More about ACM Membership...]About ACM PublicationsFor more than 60 years, the best and brightest minds in computing have come to ACM to meet, share ideas, publish their work and change the world. ACM's publications are among the most respected and highly cited in the field because of their longstanding focus on quality and their ability to attract pioneering thought leaders from both academia and industry.
[Learn More about ACM Publications...]Special Interest GroupsACM's Special Interest Groups (SIGs) represent major areas of computing, addressing the interests of technical communities that drive innovation. SIGs offer a wealth of conferences, publications and activities focused on specific computing sub-disciplines. They enable members to share expertise, discovery and best practices.
[Learn More about ACM's SIGs...]ACM and its Special Interest Groups Host More Than 170 Events WorldwideOur conferences, workshops and symposia unite innovators like you to push computing technology forward and to continue the legacy that unites us as like-minded thinkers and makers.
[Learn More about ACM Conferences...]About ACM ChaptersACM’s Professional and Student chapters worldwide serve as hubs of activity for ACM members and the computing community at large. They provide seminars, lectures, learning forums and networking opportunities with peers and experts across the computing spectrum.
[Learn More about ACM Chapters...
]About ACM AwardsACM recognizes excellence through its eminent awards for technical and professional achievements and contributions in computer science and information technology. It also names as Fellows and Distinguished Members those members who, in addition to professional accomplishments, have made significant contributions to ACM's mission.
More on ACM AwardsEducationACM’s educational activities, conducted primarily through our Education Board and Advisory Committee, range from the K-12 space (CSTA) and two-year programs to undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral-level education, and professional development for computing practitioners at every stage of their career...
[Learn More about Education…]About ACM Learning CenterThe ACM Learning Center offers ACM members access to lifelong learning tools and resources. Our E-Learning collections offer complimentary access to more than 55,000 online books and videos from top content publishers. The ACM TechTalk series brings leading computing luminaries and visionaries to your screen. Members enjoy exclusive offers and discounts on IT industry certifications and vendor-specific training.
Public PolicyACM provides independent, nonpartisan, and technology-neutral research and resources to policy leaders, stakeholders, and the public about public policy issues, drawn from the deep technical expertise of the computing community.
[Learn More about ACM's Public Policy Work...]Diversity, Equity, and InclusionAnyone, from any background, should feel encouraged to participate and contribute to ACM. ACM is committed to creating an environment that welcomes new ideas and perspectives, and where hostility or other antisocial behaviors are not tolerated.
[Learn More about ACM's Commitment to Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion...]Information for AuthorsACM Author-Izer ServiceHow to submit to ACM journalsCalls-for-PapersHow to submit to an ACM Special Interest Group (SIG) conference?Please contactAdrienne Grisctifor submission informationWhere to submit to publish your article?Instructions for Including Third-Party Material in your PaperFair Use GuidanceAuthor RightsOpen AccessCopyright and License FormsACM Computing Classification SystemACM Plagiarism PolicyACM and the Committee on Publication Ethics (COPE)ACM has joined the Committee on Publication Ethics (COPE). "COPE provides leadership in thinking on publication ethics and practical resources to educate and support members, and offers a professional voice in current debates."https://publicationethics.org/. ACM adheres to the policies of COPE.
ACM Policies on AuthorshipAnyone listed as Author on an ACM paper must meet certain criteria, including making substantial intellectual contributions to some components of the original work and drafting and/or revising the paper.
Authors submitting papers for peer-review to ACM publications will represent that the paper submitted is original; that the work submitted is not currently under review at any other publication venue; that they have the rights and intent to publish the work in the venue to which it is submitted; and that any prior publications on which this work is based are documented appropriately.
Read the entire set of criteria in thePolicy on Roles and Responsibilities in ACM Publishing.
