old id = 581
Alliance A
unknown
https://aplusalliance.org/en

New Models, New Ways of conceiving AI that correct for historic inequities and bring social programs + policies fit for the 21st century.
Expression of Interest NOW OPEN for MENA, Asia, and LACFor a free, feminist and inclusive digital future<A+> Alliance for Inclusive AlgorithmsOur Alliance seeks to catalyze a global conversation on algorithms that includes gender, race, class and region at the core of the code.
What is feminist AI?We are at a critical turning point. In order to innovate and thrive in a rapidly changing global environment, new norms are needed.
The ProblemParticularly urgent given the scale at which Algorithmic Decision-Making (ADM) systems and machine learning are being deployed, we need Affirmative Action for Algorithms, to correct real life bias and barriers that prevent women from achieving their full participation and rights in the present, and in the future, we invent.
The ProblemParticularly urgent given the scale at which Algorithmic Decision-Making (ADM) systems and machine learning are being deployed, we need Affirmative Action for Algorithms, to correct real life bias and barriers that prevent women from achieving their full participation and rights in the present, and in the future, we invent.
Call to actionWe can either seize the moment to correct bias in the digital realm, as we tackle bias in the analog world, or condemn ourselves to old bias baked into the future century of Algorithmic Decision-Making (ADM) that is trained by machine learning on biased data sets.
Call to actionWe can either seize the moment to correct bias in the digital realm, as we tackle bias in the analog world, or condemn ourselves to old bias baked into the future century of Algorithmic Decision-Making (ADM) that is trained by machine learning on biased data sets.
The f<A+i>r NetworkIn this challenging moment, the <A+> Alliance supported by the International Development Research Centre (IDRC), has launched a Feminist AI Research network to incubate Feminist AI <From Paper to Prototype to Pilot>. In the first phase of the 2021-2024 project, we launched a call for a first-round and have selected three papers to explore new models and new ways of conceiving AI that correct for historic inequities and bring social programs and policy fit for the 21st century. The second call is currently open!The use of AI will only accelerate moving forward, so we need to think about the future we want to see – both in driving the response to the COVID-19 crisis, and in creating an agenda for the future.
The f<A+i>r NetworkIn this challenging moment, the <A+> Alliance supported by the International Development Research Centre (IDRC), has launched a Feminist AI Research network to incubate Feminist AI <From Paper to Prototype to Pilot>. In the first phase of the 2021-2024 project, we launched a call for a first-round and have selected three papers to explore new models and new ways of conceiving AI that correct for historic inequities and bring social programs and policy fit for the 21st century. The second call is currently open!What’s happening nowاحتضان الذكاء الاصطناعي النسوي: دعوة لإبداء الاهتمام 2022نماذج وطرق جديدة لتصور ذكاء اصطناعي يصحح عدم المساواة التاريخية ويأتي ببرامج اجتماعية وسياسات تلائم القرن الحادي والعشرينWhat’s happening nowاحتضان الذكاء الاصطناعي النسوي: دعوة لإبداء الاهتمام 2022نماذج وطرق جديدة لتصور ذكاء اصطناعي يصحح عدم المساواة التاريخية ويأتي ببرامج اجتماعية وسياسات تلائم القرن الحادي والعشرينPilotsPrototype and Pilot Plans to be announced soonConnectJoin us on the journey and help build a digital future where everyone thrives. Help create true gender equality and democracy for both women and men, now.
Organized byOrganized by
