old id = 683
Horizons Ventures
unknown
https://horizonsventures.com

11.04.2022Ansa Biotechnologies Closes Oversubscribed $68 Million Series A Financing to Power the Next Era of DNA-Enabled IndustriesWonder DynamicsWonder DynamicsDeveloping AI production tools that will let independent artists produce blockbuster-level VFX and CGI on a fraction of the budget.
Developing AI production tools that will let independent artists produce blockbuster-level VFX and CGI on a fraction of the budget.
ILLUMINATING THE FUTURE OF CHEMICAL MANUFACTURINGAccelerate the World’s Transition to Sustainable Aviation.
Next-gen DNA synthesis using enzymesCurio is a premium audio platform with a curated library of expert journalism. It provides listeners with stories and insights on critical topics shaping our world, helping them learn and grow.
To measurably change health outcomes through better informed decisions, using health data and predictive analytics. Putting the right patient on the right treatment.
Plant-based biomaterials for regenerative medicineOrganizes the world’s video to let you instantly search and navigate vast amounts of audio-visual content in a way that resembles human memory and imagination.
uses machine intelligence and its patented technology solution to transform residential real estate, making closings instant and affordable.
Microbes for C02 drawdown at scaleBorn in Indonesia, Bobobox is the pioneer in tech-enabled sleeping pods accommodation. The company disrupts the hospitality industry with a new category in “on-demand sleep” that enables customers to have a recharging rest anytime, anywhere for as long as they need it – for a couple of hours to a couple of days – via its appPayment Help Is HereOur mission is to scale high quality medicine globally at the speed of computing by empowering clinicians with medical-grade AIsConnecting gamers through short-form videosThe Boring company designs and builds advanced 3D transportation networksBetter Coffee. Better for the Environment.
Demetrix makes the world’s rarest ingredients accessible and sustainable for healthier, happier lives. By using biotechnology and fermentation we are bringing access to cannabinoids to promote human and animal health.
Exceptional spirits made without aging or barreling, using a fraction of the usual resources. Less water. Less wood. Less land.
(ZM Nasdaq)Zoom’s mission is to develop a people-centric cloud service that transforms the real-time collaboration experience and improves the quality and effectiveness of communications forever.
Airwallex is a financial technology company that offers integrated solutions to businesses for cross-border transactions.
Teraki offers AI software that enables automotive Insurance, Predictive Maintenance, Fleet Management and AD applications.
(TSX: WELL)Unlocking the Body’s Regenerative PowerAI-Powered Transcripts You Can Trust.
Transforming biotechnology with Computer Aided BiologyTransforming the fashion ecosystem with rapidly renewable bio-based textilesGenvid is an Interactive Streaming Engine, the first built to enable developers to create new streaming experiences and monetize both viewers and players.
Leveraging technology to enable a secure financial futureAt Carmot, we apply an empirical yet directional strategy called Chemotype Evolution to explore new frontiers in our search for chemical solutions to challenging biological problems. Through this approach, we discover novel, superior therapeutics to benefit patients.
Unlimited GPU resources on demand & on any deviceNanoegg focuses on dermatologyresearch to bring comfort to people.
From vaccines without needles to anti-aging serums.
From healing eczema (atopic dermatitis) by rebuilding skin from within to hair growth tonics.
We strive to develop technologies that add value to life.
FogPharma is dedicated to the creation of a new class of medicines that target human disease drivers currently considered “undruggable.” FogPharma is pioneering the discovery and development of cell-penetrating miniproteins (CPMPs), a new and unique drug modality that is bringing the patients life to years and years to life.
Otter.ai creates technologies and products that make information from important voice conversations instantly accessible and actionable.
Fano Labs is an AI company bringing speech recognition and natural language processing technologies to enterprise call centers around the world.
Q-CTRL brings the power of control engineering to the quantum domain in order to accelerate the pathway to the first useful quantum computers.
Kneron NPU IPKneron Neural Processing Unit (NPU) allows deep learning networks to run on the edge devices to create a world where AI is Everywhere.
Inform, serve, and secure Low Earth OrbitNiYO helps you maximize your take home salary by enabling you to track, manage and claim various tax benefits like food, gift, medical, fuel, travel, phone etc.
(CDXC Nasdaq)(1337.HK HKSE)MioTech is an artificial intelligence platform that empowers investment managers to better serve their clients in a world of complex data. By integrating and analyzing data from all types of sources and providing highly customizable compliance management tools, MioTech streamlines the entire investment process, creating the ultimate data-driven investing experience. MioTech has offices in Shanghai and Hong Kong.
Improbable seeks to power previously unmakeable games and answer previously unanswerable questions that lead to a better functioning world.
World’s Next-Gen Cognitive Computing Platform for Understanding Human BehaviorDefining storytelling in virtual realityDivergent 3D licenses a software-hardware platform enabled by 3D-metal-printing that radically transforms auto manufacturing economics and environmental impact using a data-driven approach for designing and building vehicle structures.
Providing the world’s first on-demand, pay-per-use insurance for the on-demand economy, Slice insurance is cost-effective, easy to acquire, and provides superior coverage.
The bank account of the futureEvolve Biosystems will develop and bring to market the next generation of microbiome-based solutions to establish, restore, and maintain a healthy human gut microbiome across a range of unmet clinical needs.
All is IlluminatedBlockstream’s core area of innovation is sidechains, a technology focused on improving on the blockchain, the most powerful public utility for distributed trust systems.
Sidechains are blockchains that are interoperable with each other and with Bitcoin, avoiding liquidity shortages, market fluctuations, fragmentation, security breaches and outright fraud associated with alternative crypto-currencies.
Bevi is building a network of internet-connected beverage machines that create personalized drinks.
Windward has built the world’s first maritime data platform, the Windward Mind, which analyzes and organizes the world’s maritime data, making the data accessible and actionable across verticals, from flagging criminal threats at sea to identifying new market trading opportunities.
(CELH Nasdaq)To help individuals reach their true potential by utilizing products and services that are based on scientific advancements and enable a healthier lifestyle.
Quettra is a mobile intelligence platform that understands user interests from an operating system level and helps its partners present more engaging and retentive content and marketing to their users. Quettra aspires to add the ‘smart’ in smartphone, one partner at a time!Evolv Technologies is defining autonomous optimization for the digital era. Using breakthroughartificial intelligence, developed over the course of ten years, Evolv helps enterprise customerscontinuously optimize their digital KPIs and meet their goals and objectives. The company’sflagship product, Ascend, is used today by recognized brands around the world to improveexperiences across web and mobile.
Create and deliver delicious, affordable, nutritious, sustainable foods made entirely from plants to provide worldwide consumers a sensory experience that outperforms animal products.
MeMed’s disruptive technologies decodes the body’s immune response in order to guide treatment of infectious diseases, empower physicians to reduce antibiotic misuse, and address antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
Viv is a global platform that enables developers to plug into and create an intelligent, conversational interface to anything. It is the simplest way for the world to interact with devices, services and things everywhere. Viv is taught by the world, knows more than it is taught, and learns every day.
Modern Meadow is pioneering biologically advanced materials. The company harnesses the power of design, biology and material science to produce a world of biofabricated materials that are animal-free and offer new design possibilities.
BlueDot has recently developed an easy-to-access, web-based, GIS solution that can generate and communicate customized, actionable intelligence about global infectious disease threats in real-time. The current application has an integrated live stream of global epidemic intelligence from HealthMap, a web-based infectious disease surveillance system created at Harvard University. The integrated application is capable of providing end-users with valuable insights into where dangerous infectious disease threats are emerging in the world and where they are most likely to spread.
DoseBiome applies microbiome research to new foods that enhance the healthy bacteria within us.
The focus of our company is energy conservation. We center every aspect of our work at the Nanoleaf around creating higher energy efficiency, reducing Carbon foot-prints, and creating ecological value in all of our products.
(FB Nasdaq)(SPOT NYSE)Spotify is a digital music service that gives you access to millions of songs.
Bitstrips is a fun and dynamic visual identity that lets you express yourself in ways that words can’t capture.
HzO revolutionizes where and how electronics are used. Our mastery of innovation and technology, commitment to quality, and culture of execution and accountability will assure long-term sustainability and success.
Magisto transforms everyone’s plain video and photos into unforgettable, professional looking movies.
Bring to light “hidden” information within existing medical data by building decision support tools for personalized risk assessment of life threatening conditionsPerfect Day’s animal-free approach to milk production provides consumers and food manufacturers with the same products we all know and love – through a more sustainable, healthy, and humane process.
Helps private companies and funds streamline complex transaction workflows and better communicate with stakeholders. We also connect qualified investors with unique opportunities.
A bitcoin payment processor.
The essence of Cortica’s Image2Text™ technology lies in its ability to automatically extract the core concepts in images and video, and map these concepts to keywords and textual taxonomies.
Kuato Studios is capturing the excitement of learning through games. We’re producing a new standard learning-based games; combining high production values and pioneering learning methods to create personalised learning experience for each user.
Hola let you access any website in the world from anywhere.
Rubikloud is a real-time big data company offering a new methodology for processing, analyzing, and searching continuous data streams. Our platform will connect, process, and interpret any data source.
TIPA has developed breakthrough 100% biodegradable flexible packaging solutions for food& beverages. Imitating nature and just like an orange peel, TIPA’s packages are easily recycled back to nature within 180 days.
To create a happy lifestyle enjoyed by all people through technology.
Using advanced text analysis and artificial intelligence Wibbitz creates beautiful video summaries out of text articles.
Corephotonics aims to dramatically improve smartphone photography by bridging the quality gap between compact cameras and digital still cameras using cutting edge computational photography technology.
Bridging the gap between users and their devices in a privacy safe manner, thereby allowing players at various points in the digital advertising ecosystem to to focus on people instead of devices.
Tempo AI develops a smart calendar business assistant that anticipates your needs and completes tasks for you.
Our flexible time scheduling engine matches everyone’s calendars in seconds.
Pinpoint the best times to meet, schedule a service, reserve a hotel or book a flight.
2/ 35SkypeWhat is Skype?Calling, seeing, messaging and sharing with others – wherever they are.
