old id = 18
Predicting the past with Ithaca
unknown
https://www.deepmind.com/blog/predicting-the-past-with-ithaca

Predicting the past with IthacaPredicting the past with IthacaRestoring, placing, and dating ancient texts through collaboration between AI and historians.
The birth of human writing marked the dawn ofHistoryand is crucial to our understanding of past civilisations and the world we live in today. For example, more than 2,500 years ago, the Greeks began writing on stone, pottery, and metal to document everything from leases and laws to calendars and oracles, giving a detailed insight into the Mediterranean region. Unfortunately, it’s an incomplete record. Many of the surviving inscriptions have been damaged over the centuries or moved from their original location. In addition, modern dating techniques, such asradiocarbon dating, cannot be used on these materials, making inscriptions difficult and time-consuming to interpret.
In line withDeepMind’s missionof solving intelligence to advance science and humanity, we collaborated with theDepartment of Humanities of Ca' Foscari University of Venice, theClassics Faculty of the University of Oxford, and theDepartment of Informatics of the Athens University of Economics and Businessto explore how machine learning can help historians better interpret these inscriptions – giving a richer understanding of ancient history and unlocking the potential for cooperation between AI and historians.
In apaperpublished today inNature, we jointly introduce Ithaca, the first deep neural network that can restore the missing text of damaged inscriptions, identify their original location, and help establish the date they were created. Ithaca is named after the Greek island inHomer’sOdysseyand builds upon and extendsPythia, our previous system that focused on textual restoration. Our evaluations show that Ithaca achieves 62% accuracy in restoring damaged texts, 71% accuracy in identifying their original location, and can date texts to within 30 years of their ground-truth date ranges. Historians have already used the tool to reevaluate significant periods in Greek history.
To make our research widely available to researchers, educators, museum staff and others, we partnered withGoogle CloudandGoogle Arts & Cultureto launch afree interactive version of Ithaca. And to aid further research, we have alsoopen sourcedour code, the pretrained model, and an interactive Colaboratory notebook.
Collaborative toolsIthaca is trained on thelargest digital dataset of Greek inscriptionsfrom thePackard Humanities Institute.
Natural language processingmodels are commonly trained using words because the order in which they appear in sentences and the relationships between them provide extra context and meaning. For example, “once upon a time” has more meaning than each character or word seen separately. However, many of the inscriptions historians are interested in analysing with Ithaca are damaged and often missing chunks of text. To ensure our model still works when presented with one of these, we trained it using both words and the individual characters as inputs. The sparse self-attention mechanism at the model’s core evaluates these two inputs in parallel, allowing Ithaca to evaluate inscriptions as needed.
To maximise Ithaca's value as a research tool, we also created a number of visual aids to ensure Ithaca’s results are easily interpretable by historians:Contributing to historical debatesOur experimental evaluation shows how Ithaca’s design decisions and visualisation aids make it easier for researchers to interpret results. The expert historians we worked with achieved 25% accuracy when working alone to restore ancient texts. But, when using Ithaca, their performance increases to 72%, surpassing the model’s individual performance and showing the potential for human-machine cooperation to advance historical interpretation, establish relative datings for historical events, and even contribute to current methodological debates.
For example, historians currently disagree on the date of a series of importantAthenian decreesmade at a time when notable figures such as Socrates and Pericles lived. The decrees have long been thought to have been written before 446/445 BCE, although new evidence suggests a date of the 420s BCE. Although it might seem like a small difference, these decrees are fundamental to our understanding of the political history of Classical Athens.
Our training dataset contains the earlier figure of 446/445 BCE. To test Ithaca’s predictions, we retrained it on a dataset that did not contain the dated inscriptions and then submitted these held-out texts for analysis. Remarkably, Ithaca’s average predicted date for the decrees is 421 BCE, aligning with the most recent dating breakthroughs and showing how machine learning can contribute to debates around one of the most significant moments in Greek history.
We believe this is just the start for tools like Ithaca and the potential for collaboration between machine learning and the humanities. Ancient Greece plays an instrumental role in our understanding of the Mediterranean world, but it’s still only one part of a vast global picture of civilisations. To that end, we are currently working on versions of Ithaca trained on other ancient languages and historians can already use their datasets in the current architecture to study other ancient writing systems, fromAkkadiantoDemoticandHebrewtoMayan. We hope that models like Ithaca can unlock the cooperative potential between AI and the humanities, transformationally impacting the way we study and write about some of the most significant periods in human history.
This work was done by a team including contributions from Yannis Assael, Thea Sommerschield, Brendan Shillingford, Mahyar Bordbar, John Pavlopoulos, Marita Chatzipanagiotou, Ion Androutsopoulos, Jonathan Prag, and Nando de Freitas. The Ithaca web interface was developed by Justin Grayston, Benjamin Maynard, and Ricardo Cardenas from Google Cloud.
Related
