old id = 1626
MODIFIED OLIGONUCLEOTIDES: Synthesis and Strategy for Users | Annual Review of Biochemistry
1984
https://doi.org/10.1146%2Fannurev.biochem.67.1.99

MODIFIED OLIGONUCLEOTIDES: Synthesis and Strategy for UsersMODIFIED OLIGONUCLEOTIDES: Synthesis and Strategy for UsersAnnual Review of BiochemistryVol. 67:99-134 (Volume publication date July 1998)https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.biochem.67.1.99Sandeep Verma and Fritz EcksteinMax-Planck-Institut für Experimentelle Medizin, Hermann-Rein Strasse 3, D-37075 Göttingen, GermanyAbstractSynthetic oligonucleotide analogs have greatly aided our understanding of several biochemical processes. Efficient solid-phase and enzyme-assisted synthetic methods and the availability of modified base analogs have added to the utility of such oligonucleotides. In this review, we discuss the applications of synthetic oligonucleotides that contain backbone, base, and sugar modifications to investigate the mechanism and stereochemical aspects of biochemical reactions. We also discuss interference mapping of nucleic acid–protein interactions; spectroscopic analysis of biochemical reactions and nucleic acid structures; and nucleic acid cross-linking studies.
The automation of oligonucleotide synthesis, the development of versatile phosphoramidite reagents, and efficient scale-up have expanded the application of modified oligonucleotides to diverse areas of fundamental and applied biological research. Numerous reports have covered oligonucleotides for which modifications have been made of the phosphodiester backbone, of the purine and pyrimidine heterocyclic bases, and of the sugar moiety; these modifications serve as structural and mechanistic probes. In this chapter, we review the range, scope, and practical utility of such chemically modified oligonucleotides. Because of space limitations, we discuss only those oligonucleotides that contain phosphate and phosphate analogs as internucleotidic linkages.
Keywordsoligonucleotide analogs;backbone modifications;base modifications;sugar modifications;reporter groups.
SYNTHETIC METHODSSolid-Phase Chemical SynthesisThe ease of customizing reaction cycles in automated, solid-phase DNA synthesizers has allowed for efficient and site-specific introduction of chemical modifications in oligodeoxynucleotides. In the past decade, significant progress has also been made toward developing novel synthetic and deprotection strategies for oligoribonucleotide synthesis. In this section we outline the solid-phase synthetic process. Details of other synthetic methods are discussed in subsequent sections.
For the synthesis of oligodeoxynucleotide, automated solid-phase synthesizers make use of 5′-protected deoxynucleosides anchored to a controlled pore glass support at the 3′-end via a chemically cleavable linker. A series of programmed reactions sequentially couple deoxynucleoside phosphoramidites to the support-bound nucleoside. This approach circumvents the need to purify synthetic intermediates at each step of the reaction cycle, thereby saving enormous amounts of time. Finally, base hydrolysis is used to cleave the linker from the anchored nucleoside to yield a fully deprotected oligomer (1,2). A detailed description of the synthetic process and related chemistry is beyond the scope of this chapter and is described elsewhere (3). Similarly, oligoribonucleotide synthesis is also performed on solid supports through the use of appropriately protected phosphoramidites. Continued development of 2′-OH protecting groups, the use of efficient activators, and purification methods have greatly improved RNA synthesis (4,5). Despite these advances, RNA synthesis still remains less efficient, necessitating further improvement in the synthetic methodology (6).
Commercial availability of phosphoramidites of suitably protected natural and nonnatural nucleosides, such as 2′-substituted-2′deoxy- and 2′-O-methyl nucleosides, terminal nonradioactive reporter groups, and functionalized alkyl tethers for postsynthetic modifications, have greatly added to the convenience of solid-phase synthesis. The phosphoramidite approach, developed for the synthesis of oligonucleotides containing a phosphodiester backbone, can also be used to synthesize phosphorothioates by replacing the oxidation step with sulfurization (7). The solid-phase synthesis of other modified backbones, such as phosphorodithioates (8) or methylphosphonates (9), however, requires special nucleoside amidites.
The key features of automated solid-phase oligonucleotide synthesis include ease of operation, efficiency, and reproducibility. Despite these advantages, this method is difficult to use for the synthesis of long oligonucleotides (100 or more nucleotides) in high yields. In such cases, it is more convenient to use the enzymatic ligation approach, in tandem with chemical synthesis, to give an oligomer of desired length.
Enzymatic LigationThe enzymatic approach to ligate short oligonucleotides offers an attractive route for the synthesis of long deoxynucleic and ribonucleic acids. These reactions are catalyzed by DNA or RNA ligases that promote intermolecular ligation of the 5′ and 3′ termini of oligonucleotides through the formation of a phosphodiester bond.
In the case of DNA ligase, two oligodeoxynucleotides, one bearing a 5′-phosphoryl donor group and another with a free 3′-hydroxyl acceptor, constitute the substrate requirement. It is essential that the phosphorylated and the hydroxyl termini-bearing oligonucleotides be present either on homo-(DNA:DNA) or hetero-duplexes (DNA:RNA) (10,11). Oligonucleotides bearing terminal fluorescent and chemiluminescent labels can also act as substrates for DNA ligase. Such modified oligomers have been successfully employed to study cystic fibrosis gene mutations in hybridization-ligation assays (12,13).
T4 RNA ligase catalyzes the formation of a phosphodiester bond between a 5′-phosphoryl donor and a free 3′-hydroxyl acceptor group of two single-stranded oligoribonucleotides. It accepts a variety of oligonucleotide substrates for ligation. With the use of this enzyme, nucleoside analogs can be site-specifically introduced in oligoribonucleotides at the ligation junction (10). The use of this enzyme makes possible the introduction of modifications in oligoribonucleotides that are longer than those accessible by chemical synthesis alone. This methodology has been used to introduce nonstandard nucleosides in oligoribonucleotides (14,15), for fluorescent labeling of tRNA and oligodeoxynucleotides (16), for DNA strand ligation within a duplex (17), and for the synthesis of mRNA and tRNA segments (18,19). In general, the use of chemical synthesis in conjunction with enzymatic ligation provides a more efficient route to the synthesis of long oligoribonucleotides compared to the use of solid-phase chemical synthesis alone.
Two novel approaches for the ligation of oligoribonucleotides have been described. In the first method, two oligoribonucleotide fragments are annealed to a complementary oligodeoxynucleotide (cDNA) bridge and then ligated through use of T4 DNA ligase (20). With this ligation strategy, modified RNA substrates are synthesized, allowing study of the importance of the 2′-hydroxyl group in nuclear pre-mRNA splicing. It was demonstrated that T4 DNA ligase efficiently incorporated 2′-deoxy or 2′-O-methyl nucleotides immediately adjacent to the splice site of pre-mRNA substrates, with a high degree of acceptor specificity. In another method, two oligoribonucleotide fragments are annealed to a partially complementary oligodeoxynucleotide splint and then ligated through use of T4 RNA ligase (21). The DNA splint used in the latter method was designed to lack base-pairing nucleotides in the vicinity of the ligation site, thus providing single-stranded 5′-phosphoryl and 3′-hydroxyl termini for enzymatic ligation.
Enzymatic Incorporation of Nonnatural NucleotidesThe enzymatic synthesis of oligonucleotides containing modified bases, sugars, or phosphate groups is a viable alternative to chemical synthesis. Enzymatic incorporation of modified nucleoside triphosphates, with T7 or a similar phage RNA polymerase, is particularly well suited for template-directed transcription reactions, provided that they are good substrates for the polymerase. This requirement limits the number of modified nucleotides that can be used in transcription reactions; thus only a few modifications can be enzymatically introduced into oligoribonucleotides. For oligodeoxynucleotides, these modifications must be made by chain extension of a primer annealed to a template, through use of a DNA polymerase such as the Klenow fragment ofEscherichia coliDNA polymerase I.
Among internucleotidic linkages, phosphorothioate is the most common enzymatically introduced modification, as all of the four nucleoside α-thiotriphosphates are good substrates for DNA and RNA polymerases (Figure 1;22). In phosphorothioates, substitution of one of the nonbridging oxygen atoms with sulfur introduces chirality at the phosphorus center. Only the Sp-diastereomer of nucleoside α-thiotriphosphates is a good substrate for the polymerase. The enzymatic incorporation proceeds with inversion of configuration at phosphorus, resulting in the formation of the Rp internucleotidic linkage. Therefore, enzymatic synthesis is limited to the incorporation of Rp-phosphorothioate linkage (22). This methodology has been applied to the synthesis of all Rp-phosphorothioate transcripts (23) and oligodeoxynucleotides through use of either a modified T7 DNA polymerase (24) or Taq DNA polymerase (25). The applications of phosphorothioate modification are discussed later in this chapter.
2′-Deoxynucleoside triphosphates were the first sugar-modified analogs to be examined as substrates for T7 RNA polymerase (26). However, in their presence, transcription was aborted 30% of the time. Recently, the use of Mn2+instead of Mg2+, in carefully controlled ratios with respect to the ribonucleotide triphosphates, was shown to permit more efficient incorporation of these analogs (27). This report also describes the incorporation of 2′-O-methyl nucleotides, which are not incorporated under normal transcription conditions. Efficient incorporation of deoxynucleoside triphosphates can also be achieved by a mutant T7 RNA polymerase, without the requirement for special transcription conditions (28). 2′-Amino-2′-deoxynucleoside triphosphates are good substrates for the wild-type enzyme. As an example, synthesis of luciferase transcripts 2500 nt in length has been achieved (Figure 1;29). However, corresponding 2′-fluoro-2′-deoxy analogs are less readily incorporated (29). The mutant T7 RNA polymerase improves the incorporation of the 2′-fluoro derivatives (30).
T7 RNA polymerase normally initiates transcription with a guanosine triphosphate, but it can also accept other guanosine derivatives such as guanosine 5′-monophosphorothioate (31), guanosine 5′-β-thiotriphosphate (32), or guanosine 5′-γ-thiotriphosphate (33,34,35) for initiation. Applications of terminal phosphorothioates are discussed in later sections.
Postsynthetic Modification of OligonucleotidesConjugation of oligonucleotides to other biological macromolecules, to nonradioactive reporter groups, to spin labels, and to cross-linking agents has necessitated the development of postsynthetic modification procedures. The chemical strategies for oligonucleotide conjugation have been reviewed (36).
The modification of either the 3′- or the 5′-terminus is a convenient method for equipping an oligonucleotide with a reactive aminoalkyl or a mercaptoalkyl group. Introduction of these functionalities in an oligomer can be achieved either through use of appropriate commercial phosphoramidite reagents or by solution-phase chemistry. In the case of solution-phase modification, a diamino compound such as ethylenediamine or cystamine can be reacted with the 5′-phosphate group in the presence of a water-soluble carbodiimide. This reaction results in the formation of an oligonucleotide containing a reactive functional group at the 5′-terminal. The introduction of a 5′-terminal phosphorothioate group that can be used as a nucleophile is easily achieved through use of ATPγS and polynucleotide kinase (33). Alternatively, a 3′-terminal phosphorothioate can be introduced through use of 2′-deoxycytidine-5′-phosphate 3′-phosphorothioate (pdCpS) and RNA ligase (16).
Such oligonucleotide conjugates have been used extensively for a number of applications, which include cellular delivery of antisense oligonucleotides, synthesis of artificial nucleases, and hybridization probes for biological detection. Examples include conjugation of oligonucleotides to viral fusogenic peptides (37,38), staphylococcal nuclease and other enzymes (39,40), neoglycopeptides (41), phospholipids (42), thiolated polysaccharides (43), vitamin E (44), lipophilic groups such as cholesterol (45,46,47), and nonradioactive detection labels (48,49,50).
INTERNUCLEOTIDE LINKAGE MODIFICATIONPhosphorothioatesThe exchange of one nonbridging oxygen atom with a sulfur atom in the phosphorothioate modification is a conservative change, as the negative charge of the phosphate group is retained and the size of the sulfur atom is only slightly larger than the oxygen atom. However, this exchange makes the phosphorus center chiral; therefore, two diastereomers of the phosphorothioate internucleotide linkage exist (Figure 2). The chirality of the phosphorus center permits the determination of stereospecificity and the stereochemical course of reactions occurring at phosphorus. In addition, sulfur is a “soft” atom that coordinates preferentially with “soft” metal ions, whereas oxygen is a “hard” atom that coordinates to “hard” metal ions. Therefore, use of phosphorothioates also permits the identification of metal-ion binding sites in the biological systems. The phosphorothioate internucleotidic linkage is considerably more stable than the phosphodiester bond toward nucleases, and this feature makes it useful for cell culture and in vivo studies. The literature on nucleoside phosphorothioates up to 1984 has been reviewed by Eckstein (22).
Oligonucleotide phosphorothioates can be synthesized either by chemical synthesis, with use of a sulfurizing reagent in the oxidation step, or by enzymatic incorporation. Chemical synthesis produces a mixture of diastereomers, which in some cases can be separated, while the enzymatic incorporation invariably results in the formation of the Rp-diastereomeric internucleotidic linkage (7,22,23,51).
Site-specific incorporation of phosphorothioates has been used to study the stereochemical course of many nucleotidyl-transfer reactions (22). These studies have been extended to investigate reaction mechanisms involving restriction enzymes such asEcoRI (52) andEcoRV (53), DNA integration (54), and site-specific DNA recombination (55). All of these reactions proceed with an inversion of configuration as a result of a single nucleophilic substitution.
The chirality of the P-S bond in phosphorothioates can be used to identify oxygen atoms responsible for or involved in the interaction of specific phosphate groups with proteins. Such studies have been conducted extensively by the incorporation of Rp and Sp linkages at several positions in the recognition sequences forEcoRI (56) andEcoRV (57) restriction endonucleases. The latter study also identified several phosphate groups, besides those at the cleavage site, as important for catalysis.
The stereochemical course of ribozyme-catalyzed reactions such as RNA cleavage by the group I intron (58,59), pre-mRNA splicing (60,61), and group II intron self-splicing (62,63) have been studied with the use of phosphorothioates as mechanistic probes. All of these reactions proceed with an inversion of configuration of phosphorus present at the cleavage site. A comparison of the stereochemical requirements for the phosphorothioates in the individual steps allows for the establishment of similarities for different splicing systems. This analysis emphasizes a close relationship between pre-mRNA splicing and the group II splicing reaction (63,64). Inversion of configuration at the phosphorus center has also been reported for the hammerhead ribozyme-mediated catalysis (65,66), indicating an in-line mechanism that is not obvious from the X-ray structures (67,68). In another study, phosphorothioate substitution in one of the two strands involved in bacteriophage lambda recombination showed a strong bias in the choice of strands to initiate crossing-over (69).
A thorough and critical discussion of how to treat rate differences observed between phosphate and phosphorothioate substrates in enzyme-catalyzed reactions has been outlined (70). From a purely chemical viewpoint, reactivity of the phosphorothioate group should be only marginally lower than that of the phosphate diester. One study involving mechanistic investigation of the polymerase activity of Klenow DNA polymerase (71) and another study investigating the interaction of GTPγS with transducin-α (72) have pinpointed the source of the rate difference. It was suggested that steric clashes in the transition state because of the larger van der Waals radius of sulfur, rather than the electronegativity difference, result in slowing the reaction rate for the phosphorothioates.
Phosphorothioate interference studies have been widely employed to identify the role of specific phosphate groups in biochemical reactions. These studies exploit the change in binding specificity when sulfur is substituted for oxygen. Thus, any observed interference by phosphorothioates should identify specific phosphate groups important for recognition. For example, binding of a metal ion to a specific phosphate group might be altered if it is replaced by a phosphorothioate, making it easier to identify the exact position of the phosphate group involved in metal ion binding. Although the reasons for phosphorothioate interference may not always be readily understood, it is still possible to assess the mechanistic contribution of specific phosphate groups.
For interference studies with oligoribonucleotides, phosphorothioates are generally incorporated randomly by transcription. The enzymatic incorporation results in the formation of an Rp phosphorothioate linkage, and from an observed interference, the mechanistic role of the pro-Rp oxygen atom of the replaced phosphate group can be identified. The success of this method depends on the actively interfering species being separable from the inactive ones, so that the precise positions of phosphorothioate incorporation can be determined. The latter can be accomplished by iodine footprinting (73,74). A comparison of the cleavage patterns allows one to identify positions of interference with the reaction or interaction being studied.
A study using phosphorothioate interference has identified 44 phosphate groups important for Mg2+ion binding in the group I intron reaction (75,76). However, for most of these positions the cleavage reaction could be restored or rescued with Mn2+ions. This metal ion coordinates to both oxygen and sulfur atoms, whereas Mg2+ion coordinates only to oxygen atoms (77,78). Thus, the restoration of catalytic activity indicates that the pro-R oxygen atoms are coordinated to the metal ion in the splicing reaction.
The phosphorothioate interference analysis and footprinting with iodine can also be used as a probe for the identification of phosphate groups involved in RNA-protein interaction. This methodology was first applied to study the affinity of an oligoribonucleotide to the R17 coat protein (79). This method was extended to probe the interaction ofE. colitRNASerwith its cognate aminoacyl synthetase. The results suggested that the contact with the tRNA variable loop might be located on the characteristic long extended arm of the synthetase (75). With one exception, all of these contacts were later confirmed by the X-ray crystal structure analysis of the relatedThermus thermophiluscomplex (80). Results with the yeast tRNAAspsystem were also consistent with the interaction of the identity elements of the tRNA with the synthetase protein (81). Phosphorothioate footprinting has also been used to investigate the interaction between tRNAPhetranscripts fromT. thermophilusand its synthetase. In this case, iodine footprinting revealed a complex and novel pattern of tRNAPhe-synthetase interaction (82).
The phosphorothioate protection strategy has also been used to study mitochondrial group I intron RNA splicing, which involves interaction with tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase (83). These results have aided the construction of a model that suggests that the recognition of the synthetase occurs by a tRNA-like structure in the group I intron (84). Similarly, tRNA interaction with the ribosome A and P sites was also investigated to map the essential “identity elements” involved in ribosome-tRNA recognition (85). Four phosphate groups in the RNase P RNA were identified as important for an intramolecular pre-tRNA cleavage reaction (86). Besides the 4 positions identified in this study, 12 additional phosphate positions were found to be important for the binding of the pre-tRNA (87). Phosphorothioate substitution at the cleavage site of the pre-tRNA resulted in a 1000-fold reduction of the cleavage rate for both diastereomers, but rate inhibition of the Rp diastereomer could be largely restored by Cd2+, a soft metal ion (88). In yet another study, phosphorothioate substitutions of thepro-Rp oxygens in a pre-tRNA transcript revealed that direct coordination of Mg2+ion to thepro-Rp oxygen of the scissile bond is required for RNase P catalysis (89).
Recently, a “nucleotide analog interference mapping” approach has been applied to identify the functional groups essential for group I intron activity (90). Modified group I intron constructs were prepared through the substitution of inosine α-thiotriphosphate for GTP in the transcription reactions. Iodine-mediated phosphorothioate cleavage (73) was used to identify the positions of essential guanosine residues. This assay successfully mapped almost every exocyclic amino group of guanosine residues essential for the catalytic activity of the group I intron ribozyme.
Rp-phosphorothioate interference has also identified three phosphate groups, besides the group at the cleavage site, as important for catalysis by the hammerhead ribozyme (91). The importance of one of these sites, where a metal ion is coordinated to thepro-R oxygen of the A9 phosphate, has been confirmed by X-ray structural analyses (67,68). Knöll and coworkers have also used synthetic hammerhead ribozymes, containing a mixture of phosphorothioate diastereomers, for mechanistic investigations (92). They identified interference by the Sp isomer at A6 and U16.1. A metal-ion rescue could be observed with the Rp isomer at A9, which complements the observation of metal ion coordination to this site as determined by the X-ray structure. In a more recent X-ray structure, a Mg2+ion has been found coordinated to thepro-R oxygen of the phosphate group at the cleavage site (93). These results are consistent with the cleavage of the Rp phosphorothioate in the presence of Mn2+ion and that of the Sp-diastereomer in the presence of Mg2+ion (66,94). The phosphate groups required for the self-cleavage reaction by the extended hammerhead ribozyme, present in satellite 2 transcripts, has been studied by phosphorothioate interference analysis (95). This approach has also been used to map the phosphate oxygens critical for the hepatitis delta virus (HDV) ribozyme self-cleavage reaction. A set of phosphate groups and their pro-Rp oxygen atoms were identified as being important for the ribozyme activity. In particular, positions 0, 1, and 21 were deduced as the most critical for the ribozyme catalysis (96).
As is the case with other chemical cleavage methods, caution should be exercised when interpreting phosphorothioate-iodine footprinting results obtained with RNA-RNA and RNA-protein complexes. An observed protection might not be due entirely to direct nucleic acid–macromolecule interaction but may be due partly to induced conformational changes in the nucleic acid, which can bury the phosphorothioate groups accessible to iodine cleavage. Conversely, phosphorothioates can also become hyperreactive by a similar mechanism.
Phosphorothioate modification increases nuclease stability of oligonucleotides. This fact was first demonstrated in cell culture experiments with interferon-inducing polynucleotides (97). This property is particularly important when oligonucleotides are employed for in vivo therapeutic purposes such as the antisense oligonucleotide-mediated inhibition of gene expression. The applications of antisense phosphorothioate oligonucleotides were reviewed recently (98).
Resistance of phosphorothioate-modified oligonucleotides to exonuclease III has allowed for the delineation of the borders of the thymine dimer removal by the human nucleotide excision nuclease by filling the resulting gap through polymerization with the four dNTPαS nucleotides (99). Surprisingly, analysis of the excision-repair mechanism with UV-sensitive rodent cell lines, through use of a phosphorothioate patch assay, shows that such cells have normal incision, excision, and repair steps (100). In the case of the Klenow fragment, 3′-exonuclease hydrolysis differs more than 100-fold for a phosphorothioate substitution when compared to the phosphate group (101). Similarly, introduction of a single 3′-phosphorothioate also inhibits degradation of oligonucleotide primers by the 3′-exonuclease activity of the thermostable DNA polymerasesVentandPfu(102), an important consideration for the use of such primers in polymerase chain reactions.
Nuclease resistance of phosphorothioate internucleotide linkages, particularly to the restriction enzymeNciI, is the basis of an oligonucleotide-directed, site-specific mutagenesis procedure (103,104). Interestingly, to confer complete nuclease resistance, the position 5′ to the cleavage site also has to be a phosphorothioate, a phenomenon very similar to that observed for the enzymesBanII andEcoRV (105).
The isothermal single-strand displacement amplification (SDA) method, originally developed for the detection of DNA from pathogens of theMycobacteriumgenus, is based on the resistance of phosphorothioates to the restriction endonucleaseHincII (106). This methodology has been extended to mimic the rolling-circle replication of single-stranded phages (107).
The sulfhydryl anion of internucleotidic phosphorothioates can act as an efficient nucleophile for the site-specific attachment of reporter groups, such as photoaffinty agents (108) and fluorescent dyes (109), to oligodeoxynucleotides via alkylation reactions. The resulting triesters are very stable below pH 7 but are rapidly hydrolyzed under alkaline conditions. However, the rate of hydrolysis is remarkably slow for double-stranded oligonucleotides (109). Such triester formation is not possible for phosphorothioate-substituted oligoribonucleotides because the 2′-hydroxyl group readily reacts to form a cyclic 2′,3′-phosphate by displacing the reporter group via an intramolecular reaction. A similar chemical approach is the basis for the determination of the position of phosphorothioate groups in oligodeoxyribonucleotides by using iodoethanol (73) or iodine for oligoribonucleotides (74).
As mentioned before, phosphorothioate monoesters interact strongly with mercury (II), and this property has been used to purify modified oligonucleotides by mercury-affinity techniques. In contrast, phosphorothioate diesters, which are present in the internucleotidic linkage, interact poorly with mercury (II), as evident by the lack of retention of thiolated tRNA on mercury (II)-polyacrylamide gels (33). Surprisingly, a recent study demonstrated that a mercury (II) complex could be prepared using a phosphorothioate-containing oligonucleotide and γδ-resolvase. This complex was used further for X-ray structural analysis (110). A similar structural study has been reported for a phosphorothioate oligodeoxynucleotide and yeast RAP1 protein complex (111). However, this method might not be general because nonspecific interactions with protein sulfhydryl groups may cause interference.
Oligonucleotides with a phosphorothioate at the termini can be prepared by chemical synthesis (112,113), by enzymatic thiophosphorylation at the 5′ end with ATPγS (33,114), by attachment of pdCpS with RNA ligase to the 3′ end of oligoribonucleotides (16), or by initiating transcription with guanosine derivatives such as GMPS (31), GTPβS (32), and GTPγS (33,35). Terminal phosphorothioate groups in oligonucleotides have been used for a variety of purposes, such as (a) the separation of oligonucleotides or transcripts on mercury gels or columns (32,33,35), (b) reaction with haloacetyl derivatives of fluorescent dyes (16) and bromoacetyl agarose for the affinity purification of DNA-binding proteins (115), (c) reaction with photoaffinity agents (31), (d,) reaction with intercalators (112), (e) the template-directed coupling of two oligonucleotides (113,116), and (f), cross-linking a 5′-phosphorothioate oligonucleotide to its complementary sequence by reacting it with trans-platinum(II)diamine dichloride (114).
Another series of oligonucleotides have been prepared through the replacement of either the 3′- or the 5′-bridging oxygen of the phosphodiester internucleotidic linkage with sulfur or nitrogen. Oligodeoxynucleotides containing N3′-O5′phosphoramidate or N5′-O3′phosphoramidate linkages where either the 3′- or the 5′-oxygen is respectively exchanged with nitrogen possess interesting biophysical and biochemical properties (Figure 2). The amidate linkage in N3′-P5′ (117) or N5′-P3′ phosphoramidates (118,119) can be selectively cleaved by mild acidic treatment. However, N5′-O3′ (120) and N3′-O5′ phosphoramidate oligodeoxynucleotides are resistant to various nucleases and have high binding affinity for RNA (121). These properties make them suitable for antisense studies even though they do not invoke the RNaseH cleavage mechanism (122).
Oligodeoxynucleotides with 3′-S- or 5′-S-phosphorothiolate internucleotide linkage, where the bridging oxygen at position 3′- or 5′- is replaced by sulfur, have also generated considerable interest (Figure 2). These linkages are susceptible to Ag+, Hg2+and iodine-mediated chemical cleavage (123,124). However, the 3′-S-phosphorothiolate linkage is stable to the action of restriction endonucleaseEcoRV (124) and is refractory to the corresponding methylase (125). Interestingly, topoisomerase I and lambda integrase protein can cleave a 5′-S-phosphorothiolate linkage in an oligodeoxynucleotide by forming a covalent enzyme intermediate with a 5′-thio-nucleoside leaving group. In contrast, the reverse reaction with a 5′-thio-nucleoside as the attacking nucleophile, to accomplish topoisomerase-mediated ligation, is inhibited (126). This observation is not surprising because sulfur is a poor nucleophile at phosphorus and requires a good leaving group to form the P-S bond (127).
Oligonucleotides with such linkages have also been used to probe the mechanism of ribozyme catalysis. In the group I intron ribozyme-catalyzed transesterification reaction, cleavage of a substrate containing a 3′-S-phosphorothiolate internucleotidic substitution was about 1000-fold slower in the presence of Mg2+ion when compared to an unmodified phosphodiester substrate (128). However, in the presence of soft metal ions such as Mn2+and Zn2+, the cleavage activity was restored. This observation indicates a possible role of metal ions in stabilizing the negative charge on 3′-oxygen or sulfur in the transition state. Recently, the presence of a second metal ion involved in group I ribozyme catalysis was demonstrated through the use of 3′-(thioinosylyl)-(3′→5′)-uridine (IspU) dinucleotide as a substrate (129). In a reaction mimicking the exon ligation step, the IspU substrate required a second, thiophilic metal ion for optimum activity. Based on these observations, it was proposed that a second metal ion that activates the 3′-hydroxyl group of guanosine is involved in the first step of splicing.
The mechanism of the hammerhead ribozyme–catalyzed reaction has also been probed with 5′-S-phosphorothiolates. One group has used this modification at the cleavage site in a DNA substrate (130). Because there was no appreciable thio effect from changing the metal ion from Mg2+to Mn2+, the authors concluded that there is no metal ion coordination with the 5′-oxygen of the leaving group in the transition state. Contradicting arguments were presented by another group, which used an all-RNA substrate for similar experiments (131). The RNA 5′-S-phosphorothiolate substrate was cleaved almost 100 times faster than the unmodified substrate in the presence of low concentrations of Mg2+ions. It was reasoned that attack at the 2′-OH is rate-limiting for the modified substrate, whereas the departure of the leaving group is rate-limiting for the unmodified one. Rate differences observed for the hydrolysis of 3′- and 5′-S-phosphorothiolate susbtrates with different metal ions should be interpreted with caution because the metal ion-dependent hydrolysis of simple dinucleotides is not well understood (132).
PhosphorodithioatesIn the phosphorodithioate linkage, both of the nonbridging oxygens of the phosphodiester backbone are replaced by sulfur atoms (Figure 2;133,134,135). Such modified biopolymers are isostructural and isopolar to the natural nucleic acid backbone, and unlike phosphorothioates, they retain the achiral nature of the phosphorus atom.
Stability studies with phosphorodithioate oligonucleotides have demonstrated resistance to a variety of nucleases. The effect was most prominent when the dithioate modification was introduced at alternating internucleotide positions (136). However, introduction of phosphorodithioate linkages in an oligonucleotide reduces its binding to a complementary target, induces secondary structures in single-stranded oligomers (137), and enhances binding of modified oligonucleotides to proteins (138). Despite these potential drawbacks, phosphorodithioate-modified antisense oligonucleotides have been shown to interfere with the expression of erbB-2 mRNA associated with breast cancer (139), to inhibit HIV-1 reverse transcriptase activity (140), and to induce B-cell proliferation and differentiation (141).
MethylphosphonatesThe methylphosphonate internucleotidic linkage is nonionic in contrast to the polyanionic natural phosphodiester backbone (Figure 2). Solid-phase synthesis of methylphosphonate oligomers requires nucleoside methylphosphonamidites, and following the synthesis, the oligomers require special deprotection chemistry (9). Akin to the phosphorothioate linkage, replacing one nonbridging oxygen with the methyl group introduces chirality at the phosphorus center. Efforts have been made to devise new stereospecific methods for the synthesis of Rp-methylphosphonate linkage to improve the binding properties of the modified oligomers (142,143). Also determined was a high-resolution NMR structure of an alternating, chirally pure, Rp-methylphosphonate chimeric oligodeoxynucleotide hybridized to an RNA target (144).
Methylphosphonate oligomers have been shown to hybridize sequence-specifically to complementary nucleic acid targets. Examples for biological effects include antisense inhibition of herpes simplex virus replication (145), inhibition of human collagenase IV mRNA expression (146), and triplex-directed inhibition of chloramphenicol acetyltransferase mRNA expression in cell cultures (147).
In a study on deformations caused by DNA bending, several methylphosphonate linkages were introduced to create a neutral patch in the anionic phosphodiester backbone. Electrophoretic experiments revealed that the modified DNA bends toward the neutral surface (148,149). Electrophoretic gel retardation analysis with Oct-2 POU and Oct-2 POUHDproteins and 14-mer duplex targets containing diastereomeric methylphosphonate linkages was used to map phosphate groups essential for protein–nucleic acid interaction (150). This interference method relies on the fact that the introduction of methylphosphonate linkages preserve B-DNA conformation while abolishing electrostatic contacts (151). Methylphosphonate linkages were also incorporated in a four-way DNA junction. The results support the notion that charge-charge interactions influence the structure of the Holliday junction (152).
BASE MODIFICATIONSThe heterocyclic ring of purine and pyrimidine bases provides hydrogen-bonding functional groups in nucleic acids. Carefully designed base analogs, when introduced into oligonucleotides, can provide information on the importance of specific functional groups in natural bases. In interpreting results obtained with base analogs, even a subtle change in the analog can have a dramatic effect because of the change in size, electronic distribution, nucleoside sugar conformation, tautomeric structure, or functional group pKa values. Representative structures of several modified bases are presented inFigure 3, and their use is described in subsequent sections. Base analogs possessing unusual spectroscopic properties or a potential for cross-linking are discussed in appropriate sections.
Purine ModificationsThe imine nitrogen at position 7 of purine nucleosides is located in the major groove of B-form DNA and can act as a potential hydrogen bond acceptor site in the recognition processes. For example, this nitrogen atom is used as a hydogen bond acceptor in Hoogsteen base pairing. 7-Deazapurine nucleosides, which lack the N-7 nitrogen atom, are therefore valuable probes for studying the role of N-7 nitrogens in recognition. These analogs can easily be incorporated in oligonucleotides, either by enzymatic means (153) or by automated solid-phase synthesis (154,155). Because of altered base stacking, oligonucleotides containing 7-deazapurine analogs destabilize DNA duplex slightly, and the effect is sequence dependent (156).
The interaction of thetrprepressor with thetrp EDCBAoperon was studied through the use of 7-deazaadenine and 7-deazaguanine to validate the importance of four purine N-7 nitrogens implicated in recognition (157). Other studies also have used these analogs to investigate protein-DNA (158,159) and restriction enzyme–DNA interactions (125,160,161).
The role of purine N-7 nitrogens in the folding of G-rich telomere sequences was investigated through the use of 7-deazaadenine and 7-deazaguanine substitutions (162). G-rich oligonucleotide sequences possess a high propensity to form tetraplexes through hydrogen bonding between the N-7 nitrogen of one guanine and the N-2 hydrogen of another. The effect of 7-deaza substitutions on tetraplex formation was studied by gel electrophoretic mobility shift experiments and guanine- and adenine-specific chemical footprinting reactions. Based on these experiments, the role of guanine N-7 nitrogen in stabilizing tetraplexes by specific hydrogen bond formation was confirmed.
Other examples that have exploited 7-deazapurine analogs are studies of DNA-DNA contacts in homologous recombination (163), the role of tertiary interactions and self-cleavage of hepatitis delta virus ribozyme (164), and tertiary structure mapping of the retinoblastoma gene (165).
The N-3 nitrogen of purines is located in the minor groove of DNA and is not directly involved in base pairing through hydrogen bond formation. However, 3-deazaadenosine substitution in the hammerhead ribozyme considerably reduces its catalytic efficiency, which indicates an important role for the N-3 nitrogen atom in the reaction (166). Similarly, when 3-deazaadenosine was substituted in the recognition sequence ofEcoRV methylase, the enzymatic reaction was inhibited, thus implying a role for N-3 nitrogen in protein-DNA recognition (167).
Another purine analog, N-1-methylguanosine, when substituted in the core region of the hammerhead ribozyme, completely inhibits its catalytic activity (168). This analog has also been incorporated into a tRNAAsp, where it abolished mischarging (169).
2-Aminopurine is often used for fluorescence measurements, which are discussed further in a subsequent section. Other analogs such as purine, isoguanine, 2,6-diaminopurine, 6-thioguanine, and hypoxanthine have been used as probes for the identification of purine nucleosides essential for protein-DNA interaction (167,170,171,172) and RNA catalysis (166,173,174,175) and to estimate the contribution of the hydrophobic interaction in duplex stability (176). A more detailed account of purine and pyrimidine nucleoside analogs and their utility in delineating biochemical mechanisms can be found elsewhere (177,178).
Pyrimidine Modifications2-Pyrimidinone and 4-thiouridine ribonucleosides have been used to assess the participation of conserved pyrimidine bases in making hydrogen-bonding contacts in the catalytic core of hammerhead ribozyme (179). This study provided evidence for a magnesium ion-binding site in the catalytically active ribozyme. 2- and 4-pyridinone ribonucleosides have also been used to study the structure-function relationship of the hammerhead ribozyme (180).
The role of conserved deoxycytidine residues in template recognition by bacteriophage T7 primase was studied with oligonucleotides containing 2-pyrimidinone and 5-methyldeoxycytidine bases (181). The importance of the hydrogen-bonding framework for protein-DNA recognition in conjunction with other nucleoside substitutions was demonstrated.
Oligonucleotides containing a propynyl substituent at the C-5 position of pyrimidines possess high binding affinity toward complementary RNA targets and display a gene-specific antisense effect (182,183). When such modified oligonucleotides additionally contain phosphorothioates, they can be used to target low and high copy messages with equal efficiency (184). Remarkably, a sequence-specific inhibition of gene expression has been observed with a C-5 propyne antisense phosphorothioate as short as a heptanucleotide (185).
Universal BasesNatural nucleobases display exquisite selectivity in recognizing complementary bases. A universal base can be defined as an analog that can substitute for any of the four natural bases in oligonucleotides without significantly impairing the duplex stability. In general, universal base analogs use aromatic ring stacking, instead of specific hydrogen bonds, to stabilize a duplex. However, universal recognition by imidazole-4-carboxamide nucleoside has been attributed to specific hydrogen-bonding contacts (186).
The efficiency of oligonucleotide primers containing multiple substitutions of 5-nitroindole (187,188) and 3-nitropyrrole (189,190) has been studied and compared in DNA sequencing and in polymerase chain reactions. These analogs can be used at primer sites corresponding to degenerate base positions and specifically where the sequence data is incomplete. The use of imidazole-4-carboxamide nucleoside in oligonucleotide templates results in nucleotide misincorporation during PCR amplification, and it has been suggested that this property can be further used to generate mutant gene libraries (186).
Depending on the length of the oligonucleotides, a true mismatch in a DNA hybrid is often difficult to detect. A recent study used 3-nitropyrrole-containing oligonucleotide probes to analyze either a PCR-amplified or an allele-specific PCR-amplified polymorphic region of the HLA-DRB locus by artificial mismatch hybridization (191). The presence of 3-nitropyrrole in a hybridization probe created an artificial mismatch, and it provided an excellent discrimination between perfectly matched and mismatched duplexes when compared to conventional hybridization methods.
Abasic NucleosidesDeletion of the purine or pyrimidine bases from the deoxyribose or ribose sugar moiety gives rise to abasic nucleosides. These analogs preserve the sugar hydroxyl groups; therefore, any biochemical effect observed from their use results directly from the loss of the heterocyclic ring. A deoxy-abasic nucleoside was used to replace both dA and T in a dA/T base pair to study the binding ofEcoRV DNA methyltransferase to its recognition sequence (171). Such a substitution is expected to disrupt hydrogen bonding and was therefore used to assess the role of base pairing to protein-binding affinity.
Substitution of abasic ribonucleosides in the hammerhead ribozyme significantly impairs its catalytic activity (192). However, it was possible to restore the activity of four ribozymes by a simple addition of the missing base. This finding indicated that the ribozyme structure can be engineered to create a binding site for small ligands. Other studies using ribo-abasic residue include the recognition of branch-point adenosine in the Group II introns (175); the identification of essential base residues in loop B of the hairpin ribozyme (193); the importance of the stem-loop II; and the importance of conserved U residues in the catalytic core of hammerhead ribozyme (194,195).
SUGAR MODIFICATIONThe 2′-deoxyfuranose ring in oligodeoxynucleotides can adopt C′3-endo and C′3-exo as two major, interchangeable conformations, whereas the C′3-endo sugar ring conformation is maintained in oligoribonucleotides (196). The electronegativity of the 2′-substituent has a profound effect on the sugar conformation, and as a result of such substitution, the population of C′3-endo conformer increases with an increase in the electronegativity. Several sugar modifications, primarily at the 2′-position, have been described, and there has been renewed interest in oligoribonucleotides containing such modifications to generate nuclease-resistant RNA aptamers and ribozymes.
Sugar-modified analogs have been used extensively to study ribozymes and RNA aptamers to probe the importance of specific 2′-hydroxyl groups in catalysis and to provide resistance against nucleases. The 2′-hydroxyl modifications introduced to probe hammerhead ribozyme catalysis include deoxy (197,198); fluoro, amino (199,200); methoxy, allyloxy (201); and 2′-C-allyl substituents (202). 2′-Deoxy- or 2′-O-methyl sugar modifications have been introduced to identify the positions of 2′-hydroxyl groups necessary for the hairpin ribozyme activity (203). Interactions involving 2′-hydroxyl groups, and the importance of having a ribose moiety at the cleavage site inTetrahymenaribozyme reaction, have been studied through the use of 2′-deoxy- and 2′-fluoro-substituted nucleosides (204,205,206,207). 2′-Deoxy substitution has also been used to investigate the role of active-site 2′-hydroxyl groups in group II intron molecular recognition and catalysis (208). Recently, incorporation of 2′-deoxy-2′-mercaptocytidine into an oligonucleotide, via suitably protected phosphoramidite, has been reported (209). However, enzymatic incorporation of 2′-mercapto group-containing modified nucleotides remains to be established.
2′-Fluoro- and 2′-difluoro-2′-deoxyuridine–containing oligonucleotides have been used to investigate the mechanism of human G/T glycosylase (210). The modified oligonucleotides resisted the excision repair activity of the enzyme and resulted in the formation of a tight-binding DNA-glycosylase complex. Based on these observations, a rationale for preferential repair of deaminated CpG sites was presented.
When a variety of selection protocols were employed, high-affinity nucleic acid aptamers were isolated. These aptamers can recognize a wide range of molecular targets such as antibiotics, amino acids, nucleoside triphosphates, cofactors, organic dyes, porphyrins, and proteins (211). Improved chemical and enzymatic stability is essential for the development and use of RNA-based aptamers in therapeutics and diagnostics. The substitution of 2′-fluoro- and 2′-aminopyrimidines in RNA imparts resistance to nucleases (200). Moreover, these modifications can be introduced easily during aptamer selection because the corresponding nucleotide triphosphates are good substrates for T7 RNA polymerase (29,30). When these analogs were used, nuclease-resistant aptamers were isolated against the basic fibroblast growth factor (212), human thyroid-stimulating hormone (213), a monoclonal antibody that recognizes the main immunogenic region of the human ACh receptor (214), and the keratinocyte growth factor (215).
2′-O-methyl-modified, biotinylated oligoribonucleotides have been used as antisense probes for mapping U2 snRNP-pre-mRNA interactions and for studying structure and function of U4/U6 snRNPs (216,217). Modified nucleosides such as 2′-deoxy and 2′-O-methyl have also been placed at either the 3′- or the 5′-splice site of a nuclear pre-mRNA to aid in understanding chemical steps involved in the spliceosomal assembly (20). In vitro studies revealed that the presence of the 2′-hydroxyl group is more important at the 3′-splice site for the second step in the splicing reaction, which results in ligation of two exons with a concomitant release of an intron.
Posttranscriptional nuclear processing of most eukaryotic mRNAs involves 3′-end polyadenylation, which is suggested to confer stability to the transcript. A highly conserved hexameric-sequence AAUAAA, present in the transcript, acts as a polyadenylation signal by binding a specificity factor protein. 2′-O-methyl ribose-modified nucleosides were chemically substituted at all nucleotide positions in synthetic RNA substrates, including the signal sequence, to aid in the study of the polyadenylation reaction in vitro (218). A single 2′-O-methyl substitution, within the AAUAAA sequence, inhibited the polyadenylation and binding of the specificity factor. Oligoribonucleotides with substitutions at any position, except the 3′-terminal adenosine, were efficiently polyadenylated.
Another sugar modification involves replacement of the O-4′ furanose ring oxygen with a methylene group to give carbocyclic analogs. Such sugar-modified analogs of thymidine and 5-methyl-2′-deoxycytidine have been incorporated in oligodeoxynucleotides to allow study of their effect on triplex formation (219). The mechanism of action of the MutY protein ofE. coli, which deletes mismatched deoxyadenosine residues from a DNA substrate, has been studied through use of the carbocyclic analog of 2′-deoxyadenosine (220). The proposed mechanism of excision involves an enzyme-catalyzed attack of water on the C-1′ carbon to displace the base from the duplex, followed by the opening of the furanose ring to give an acyclic structure. In accordance with the proposed mechanism, it was found that DNA substrates containing carbocyclic dA analog, designed to prevent the ring opening step, were not excised by the MutY protein. Ribocarbocyclic analogs of cytidine and adenosine have been chemically incorporated in the hammerhead ribozyme to confer RNase resistance to these ribozyme constructs (221).
The O-4′ ring oxygen can also be replaced by sulfur to result in 4′-thiofuranose modification, and oligonucleotides containing such modification have been used to probe protein-DNA interactions such as in theEcoRV restriction endonuclease and methylase systems (125,222). In one study, modified deoxynucleosides possessing an inverted C4′ configuration or capable of forming C4′ adducts were incorporated in DNA templates to investigate structural the requirement of the Klenow fragment ofE. coliDNA pol I (223). The polymerase halts transiently at inversions while adduct-forming modifications completely inhibit the DNA synthesis.
The furanose ring oxygen has also been replaced with a pyrrolidine ring. This modified base has been incorporated in a 25-mer to study mechanism-based inhibition of anE. coliDNA repair enzyme, 3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase II (224).
NONRADIOACTIVE LABELS OF OLIGONUCLEOTIDESFluorescent Labels2-Aminopurine (2AP), a fluorescent nucleoside analog, has been used extensively to detect changes in oligonucleotide conformation (225). It can substitute for adenosine in base pairing with thymidine without distorting the double helix. The absorption and excitation maximum for 2AP is at 330 nm and has an emission at 380 nm. The quantum yield of 2AP fluorescence, when substituted in oligonucleotides, depends on the degree of base stacking (226). Therefore, any change in its fluorescence is a sensitive indicator of structural perturbations in the modified oligonucleotide and provides an insight into the dynamics of such processes. Temperature-dependent conformational changes in oligonucleotides (227) and the dynamics of mismatched base pairs in oligodeoxynucleotides have been followed in the monitoring of change in fluorescence intensity of 2AP (228). Several reports have described the use of 2AP-containing oligonucleotides to study base-pairing interactions in DNA polymerase 3′-5′-exonuclease proofreading (229,230,231), kinetics of nucleotide incorporation with the Klenow fragment and T4 DNA polymerase, (232,233), and the helicase-catalyzed unwinding of duplex DNA (234). In one study, Mg2+ion-induced conformational perturbations in the hammerhead ribozyme tertiary structure were followed by the monitoring of change in fluorescence of 2AP. The data were used to determine the affinity constants for Mg2+ion binding (235).
A fluorescent pteridine analog, 3-methyl-8-(2-deoxy-β-D-ribofuranosyl) isoxanthopterin, has been introduced as a guanosine mimic for mechanistic studies (236). The fluoroscence of this analog, when incorporated into an oligodeoxynucleotide identical to the U5 terminal sequence of HIV-1, increases with 3′-processing reaction of integrase. This analog extends the repertoire of fluorescent nucleosides, even though its base-pairing properties are not well documented. 5-Methyl-2-pyrimidinone has been reported as an alternative to 2AP, but it has not found wider application, presumably because of the lack of base-pairing capabilities (237).
Fluorescent reporter groups have also been attached to the 5-position of deoxyuridine, via aminoalkyl linkers, to follow oligonucleotide-protein interactions. One such study with template/primer oligonucleotides, where a fluorescent dansyl probe was appended at various nucleotide positions from the 3′-end of the primer, indicated that the Klenow polymerase remains in contact with the template/primer up to six nucleotides from the 3′-end (238). Similarly, contacts between a 42-mer oligonucleotide and theE. coliregulatory protein TyrR were also identified through the use of such nucleoside analogs (239).
A fluorescent derivative has also been attached to 5-sulfhydryl-deoxyuridine triphosphates for polymerization into a template/primer for the determination of dissociation constants of DNA and the dNTPs for the Klenow fragment ofE. coliDNA polymerase I (240).
Fluorescent dyes have been attached to oligodeoxynucleotides by the reaction of internucleotidic phosphorothioates with 5-iodoacetamido-eosin and -fluorescein (241). Distances calculated from fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) studies that used the fluorescently tagged oligonucleotides were in reasonable agreement with B-DNA helical structure.
A variety of reporter groups have been attached sequence-specifically to oligodeoxynucleotides by the oxidation of an internucleotidic H-phosphonate in presence of cystamine to form a phosphoramidate linkage (242). Reduction of cystamine results in a free sulfhydryl group that can act as a nucleophile to react with thiol-specific reporter groups. However, this modification results in a pair of diastereomers that might have to be separated for an accurate interpretation of the spectroscopic data.
Fluorescent dyes have also been attached to the sugar of dideoxynucleoside triphosphates to act as chain terminators in fluorescence-based DNA sequencing (243). In one study, two dyes were attached to the sequencing primer, with a common donor at the 5′-end, and to four different acceptors at a thymidine within the primer, which facilitate DNA sequencing with the use of FRET measurements (244). Recently, guanosine-specific fluorescence quenching of 3′-fluorescein-labeled oligoribonucleotides was used to determine rate constants for substrate binding, cleavage, and dissociation of the hairpin ribozyme (245). There is considerable literature on fluorescent dyes attached at the termini of oligonucleotides, particularly for FRET studies; this literature has been reviewed elsewhere (225).
Electron Spin Resonance ProbesElectron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) is an elegant method of monitoring global tumbling and internal motion of oligonucleotides. A nitroxide spin-label probe has been attached to the 5-position of deoxyuridine, via a mono- or diacetylene tether, to form a complementary base pair with an adenosine (246). A quinolonyl nitroxide analog has base paired with 2-aminopurine nucleoside (247). This derivative seems to be particularly attractive because the motion of the spin label can be directly correlated to that of the base. A nitroxide spin label has also been introduced at the phosphate backbone, via a phosphoramidate sulfhydryl tether, but EPR measurements were not reported (242).
Resonance Raman SpectroscopyThe UV-absorbance maximum at 330–340 nm of 4-thiothymidine facilitates assignment of the bands in the resonance Raman spectrum to a specific nucleotide. Raman spectroscopy was performed on a complex ofEcoRV endonuclease with an oligodeoxynucleotide containing 4-thiothymidine, which represents the enzyme recognition sequence (248). The observations were found to be consistent with the distortion of the DNA as seen in the X-ray structure. Such distortion was not observed with a nonsubstrate oligonucleotide. These results document the utility of this analog for its use in Raman spectroscopic studies.
NUCLEIC ACID CROSS-LINKINGChemically modified oligonucleotides are extremely useful in fixing conformations by introducing cross-links in DNA, RNA, or nucleic acid–protein complexes. Site-specific cross-linking permits the determination of the proximity of nucleotides or amino acids because the cross-linking would not be possible at distances greater than the length of the spacer. Such reagents are usually attached to either the base or the sugar moiety, and in most cases, the sulfhydryl group is used for introducing cross-links.
Chemical Cross-LinksA versatile strategy for the cross-linking of DNA and RNA oligomers results from the recently described convertible nucleoside approach (249,250,251). In this method, uridine and inosine derivatives possessing good leaving groups at the 4 or 6 position, respectively, are incorporated site-specifically in oligonucleotides. Subsequent reaction of the convertible nucleoside, at the oligonucleotide level, with a symmetrical ω, ω-dithiobis(alkylamine), results in the formation of cytidine and adenosine derivatives bearing an alkyl disulfide tether. Reduction of the disulfide linkage results in the formation of a free sulfhydryl group, which can be reoxidized to form a cross-link. For example, this approach has been applied to form adenine-adenine cross-links at 5′-AT-3′ sequences in the major groove and guanine-guanine cross-links at 5′-GC-3′sequences in the minor groove of oligodeoxynucleotides. Such an interstrand cross-link mimics a bent DNA structure and binds to a high mobility group protein, thereby supporting the view that this protein recognizes bent DNA (252). An interstrand disulfide bridge has been utilized to prevent DNA strand separation in the DNA-(cytosine-5) methyltransferase-catalyzed reaction (253). It was suggested that reduction in the rate of methylation of the cross-linked oligonucleotide was due to the extrusion of the cytosine to an extrahelical position in the normal substrate oligonucleotide. Oligoribonucleotides can also be cross-linked in this manner, as exemplified by the formation of an intramolecular disulfide in an RNA ministem loop (254).
In another approach, a mercaptoalkyl group is attached to the N-3 of a pyrimidine base, such as in N-3-thioethylthymidine (255). When incorporated at the 3′-end and 5′-end of two oligonucleotides, the sulfhydryl group can be oxidized, thus linking two oligonucleotides through the formation of disulfide loops. The cross-link imparts greater thermal stability and a unique conformation. Mercaptoethyl groups can also be attached to C5 of pyrimidines and oxidized to the disulfides, as described for the cross-linking of triple helices and tRNA (256,257). Interstrand disulfide cross-linking can also be obtained through the use of 6-mercaptopurine and 4-thiothymidine bases in an oligodeoxynucleotide without the employment of tether (258).
Cross-linked duplexes have been prepared to allow the study of the mechanism of DNA polymerases through the introduction of an aziridinyl group at the 4-position of a cytidine or at position 6 of guanosine, which can react with the 4-amino group of a mismatched cytidine in the complementary strand to link two cytidines or a 2,6 diaminopurine and cytidine, respectively, by an ethylene bridge (259,260).
In some systems, however, cross-linking via base modification is undesirable. Therefore, attachment of the cross-linking reagent via the sugar moiety is preferred. This approach has been used to discriminate between two models of the hammerhead ribozyme, one based on X-ray crystallographic analysis and the other based on FRET results (261). In this method, the nucleotides to be linked were replaced by the corresponding 2′-amino nucleotides, which were then reacted with 2-pyridyl 3-isothiocyanatobenzyl disulfide. After reduction, an intrastrand disulfide was reintroduced by oxidation, and the catalytic activity of cross-linked ribozymes was determined. Recently, more reactive aliphatic isocyanates have been used for the cross-linking of the hairpin ribozyme as part of an effort to build a first 3-D model (262; DJ Earnshaw, B Masquida, S Müller, STh Sigurdsson, F Eckstein, et al, manuscript in preparation). This method has been further extended to introduce interstrand disulfide cross-links, by a sulfhydryl exchange reaction, in a group I ribozyme (264). The cross-linked ribozymes were catalytically competent, and this observation reveals interesting dynamic properties of large catalytic RNAs.
Alternatively, 2′-hydroxyl groups have also been derivatized with ethylthio groups to introduce intra- and interhelical disulfide cross-links in tRNAPhe(256).
Photoaffinity Cross-LinkingNatural nucleosides can be photoactivated to form new bonds under favorable distance conditions. A good example is the formation of a cross-link between a cytidine and a uridine residue, which was observed upon irradiation in yeast tRNAPheand was found to be consistent with the X-ray structure (265). Another example is described for the hairpin ribozyme, in which a uridine and a guanosine in a loop were cross-linked in high yields (266).
Usually, the cross-linking yields obtained with the natural nucleotides are low. Moreover, the wavelength required for activation is around 260 nm, which is not specific for a particular nucleotide. Thus, analogs that are more reactive and absorb at a higher wavelength are usually preferred for photoactivated cross-linking. 4-Thiothymidine and -uridine, 5-bromo- and -iodouridine, and 6-thioguanosine meet this requirement and are also able to form Watson-Crick base pairs. The most frequently used analogs are 4-thiouridine and 4-thiothymidine, which absorb at 331 nm and can be irradiated between 300 and 400 nm for activation (267). The first intrastrand RNA site-specific cross-link with 4-thiouridine was achieved upon irradiation of yeast tRNAVal, which contains 4-thiouridine as a natural constituent (268). In one study, 4-thiouridine was incorporated by enzymatic methods in oligoribonucleotides. Depending on its position, cross-links were observed to ribosomal proteins and 16S RNA (269).
The chemical synthesis of oligodeoxy- and oligoribonucleotides containing 4-thiopyrimidine and 6-thiodeoxyguanosine requires special protection of the sulfhydryl group (267,270). TheEcoRV restriction endonuclease and modification methylase have been investigated with oligonucleotides containing these analogs (267). These analogs could be cross-linked to the enzymes with higher yields for 4-thiothymidine compared to 6-thiodeoxyguanosine. Unfortunately, oligonucleotides without the recognition sequences were also cross-linked as a result of nonspecific binding.
4-Thiouridine has been incorporated at specific positions in an adenovirus pre-mRNA, through the Moore and Sharp ligation approach (20), to identify contacts to snRNAs during splicing reaction (271). Cross-links were observed with a loop sequence in U5 snRNA and with an invariant sequence of U6. Also investigated through use of a similar strategy is strand-specific cross-linking between 4-thiouridine-modified human tRNALyswith HIV-1 reverse transcriptase subunits p66 and p51 (272). 4-Thiouridine was used to cross-link small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles U11 and U6atac to the 5′-splice site of an AT-AC intron found in metazoan genes (273).
6-Thioinosine and 4-thiouridine have been used as photoaffinity probes to study hammerhead and hairpin ribozyme conformations (274). Multiple cross-links were found in both of the cases, and the results were difficult to explain on the basis of models. It was concluded that these ribozymes can adopt multiple conformations, making it difficult to identify catalytically competent conformations by this approach alone.
5-Bromo- and 5-iodouridine, which can be activated at 308 and 325 nm, respectively, are also convenient photoaffinity labels, as exemplified by the cross-linking of an RNA transcript and an oligodeoxynucleotide containing these modified nucleosides to the bacteriophage R17 coat protein (275,276). Protein photodamage was considerably reduced with the iodo derivative. A telomeric DNA containing 5-bromodeoxyuridine has been cross-linked to theOxytrichatelomeric protein (277). Two of the three cross-links were traced to the tyrosine residues in the hydrophobic region, suggesting that intercalation plays a major role in protein-telomeric DNA binding.
The 5-position of uridine and deoxyuridine can be conveniently functionalized, without hydrogen bonding interaction being affected, to attach various nonradioactive probes. In one of the first reports, biotin was covalently attached at the 5-position of thymidine or uridine triphosphate for incorporation into DNA or RNA, respectively, for a subsequent streptavidin-affinity isolation (278). Many biotin phosphoramidites are commercially available for solid-phase chemical coupling to oligonucleotides. A similar approach uses incorporation of probes such as digoxigenin (DIG) or fluorescein instead of biotin. For photo-cross-linking, azido-nitrobenzoate has been coupled to the 5′-position, via an amino linker, and the nucleotide has been incorporated chemically into oligonucleotides to allow study of the contact with the Klenow fragment (279), T4 DNA polymerase (280), andE. coliDNA polymerase III (281).
In one study, multiple 5-methyleneaminouridine triphosphate residues were introduced in oligoribonucleotides by T7 RNA polymerase transcription of synthetic DNA templates (282). The free amino group in modified uridine was postsynthetically derivatized, at the RNA level, with an azirinyl group-containing reagent. The photo-cross-linking results with the azirinyl-uridine derivative and 6-thioguanosine were used to study the binding of radiolabeled mRNA analogs toE. coliribosomes. Precise cross-link positions were determined by a combination of ribonuclease H and T1digestion and by primer extension analysis.
8-Azidoadenosine and -guanosine are frequently used for the photoaffinity labeling of enzymes (283,284). Due to incompatibility of the azido group with phosphoramidite-based chemical synthesis, these analogs are not suitable for automated synthesis. However, enzymatic methods have been used to incorporate 8-azidoadenosine into the acceptor stem of tRNAs to probe its interaction with ribosomes (285). 5-Azido-uridine and -deoxyuridine triphosphates, with maximum absorption at around 300 nm, are also suitable for photoactivated cross-linking and are substrates for RNA and DNA polymerases. However, affinity labeling studies have not been reported with these analogs (286).
5-Sulfhydryluridine triphosphate has been enzymatically incorporated into RNA, followed by subsequent derivatization with azidophenacyl bromide for cross-linking to several RNA polymerases (287).
Posttranscriptional reaction of a 5′-terminal guanosine phosphorothioate is a versatile method to attach a photoactivatable azidophenacyl group to the transcipts. Upon irradiation, intra- and intermolecular cross-links in RNase P RNA were obtained in the absence or presence of pre-tRNA (288). In another study, RNA containing a 5′-terminal phosphorothioate was derivatized with an azidophenacyl group to determine the tertiary structure of the ribonuclease P ribozyme-substrate cross-linked complex (289). A similar cross-linking study was also used to identify “neighbors” in the group I intron ribozyme (290).
A solid-phase synthesis of an oligodeoxynucleotide that was site-specifically platinated, employing a cisplatin-derivatized deoxyguanosine 3′-H-phosphonate monomer, has been described (291). In another study, 2′-O-methyl oligoribonucleotides were postsynthetically modified with transplatin to give a 1,3-intrastrand cross-linked oligomer (292). When hybridized with complementary RNA strands, intrastrand platinated oligomers trigger the formation of specific interstrand cross-links. The utility of transplatin-modified oligoribonucleotides was demonstrated through the introduction of cross-links in Ha-ras mRNA and through concomitant inhibition of cell proliferation.
CONCLUSIONSChemically modified oligonucleotides have been immensely helpful in understanding mechanistic and stereochemical aspects of numerous biochemical reactions and processes. The imagination and ability of chemists will ensure that tailor-made nucleoside analogs will be synthesized to answer specific questions in the future. There is, however, a real challenge to widen the arsenal of nucleotide analogs that can be enzymatically incorporated into nucleic acids. Novel strategies, such as mutant polymerases, will have to be devised to achieve this goal.
AcknowledgmentWe thank Paul A. Heaton for valuable comments on the manuscript.
Literature CitedAnalysis of Genes, Transcripts, and Proteins via DNA LigationCryo-EM Studies of Pre-mRNA Splicing: From Sample Preparation to Model VisualizationMECHANISTIC ASPECTS OF ENZYMATIC CATALYSIS: Lessons from Comparison of RNA and Protein EnzymesDNA-Encoded Chemical Libraries: A Selection System Based on Endowing Organic Compounds with Amplifiable InformationCpG Motifs in Bacterial DNA and Their Immune EffectsDiscovery and Development of Therapeutic AptamersEukaryotic Ribonuclease P: A Plurality of Ribonucleoprotein EnzymesRIBONUCLEASE P: Unity and Diversity in a tRNA Processing RibozymeEnzyme-Mediated DNA LoopingV(D)J Recombination: RAG Proteins, Repair Factors, and RegulationIntegrating DNA: Transposases and Retroviral IntegrasesTARGET SITE SELECTION IN TRANSPOSITIONEnzyme-Mediated DNA LoopingV(D)J Recombination: RAG Proteins, Repair Factors, and RegulationIntegrating DNA: Transposases and Retroviral IntegrasesTARGET SITE SELECTION IN TRANSPOSITIONCatalytic Strategies of the Hepatitis Delta Virus RibozymesBiological Phosphoryl-Transfer Reactions: Understanding Mechanism and CatalysisMECHANISTIC ASPECTS OF ENZYMATIC CATALYSIS: Lessons from Comparison of RNA and Protein EnzymesOrigins and Evolution of Spliceosomal IntronsGroup II Intron Self-SplicingGroup II Intron Self-SplicingMECHANISTIC ASPECTS OF ENZYMATIC CATALYSIS: Lessons from Comparison of RNA and Protein EnzymesMechanisms and Regulation of Alternative Pre-mRNA SplicingRNA RECOGNITION BY RNP PROTEINS DURING RNA PROCESSINGNot As They SeemComparative Enzymology and Structural Biology of RNA Self-CleavageThe Structure-Function Dilemma of the Hammerhead RibozymeCatalytic Strategies of the Hepatitis Delta Virus RibozymesRibozyme Structures and MechanismsRibozyme Structures and MechanismsCRYSTALLOGRAPHIC STRUCTURES OF THE HAMMERHEAD RIBOZYME: Relationship to Ribozyme Folding and CatalysisComparative Enzymology and Structural Biology of RNA Self-CleavageThe Structure-Function Dilemma of the Hammerhead RibozymeCatalytic Strategies of the Hepatitis Delta Virus RibozymesRibozyme Structures and MechanismsRibozyme Structures and MechanismsCRYSTALLOGRAPHIC STRUCTURES OF THE HAMMERHEAD RIBOZYME: Relationship to Ribozyme Folding and CatalysisComparative Enzymology and Structural Biology of RNA Self-CleavageThe Structure-Function Dilemma of the Hammerhead RibozymeRibozyme Structures and MechanismsRibozyme Structures and MechanismsStructural Motifs in RNARNA Folds: Insights from Recent Crystal StructuresRIBONUCLEASE P: Unity and Diversity in a tRNA Processing RibozymeCRYSTALLOGRAPHIC STRUCTURES OF THE HAMMERHEAD RIBOZYME: Relationship to Ribozyme Folding and CatalysisMECHANISTIC ASPECTS OF ENZYMATIC CATALYSIS: Lessons from Comparison of RNA and Protein EnzymesHIERARCHY AND DYNAMICS OF RNA FOLDINGUnderstanding Nucleic Acid–Ion InteractionsComparative Enzymology and Structural Biology of RNA Self-CleavageStructural Principles From Large RNAsThe Structure-Function Dilemma of the Hammerhead RibozymeRibozyme Structures and MechanismsRibozyme Structures and MechanismsStructural Motifs in RNARNA Folds: Insights from Recent Crystal StructuresCRYSTALLOGRAPHIC STRUCTURES OF THE HAMMERHEAD RIBOZYME: Relationship to Ribozyme Folding and CatalysisRIBONUCLEASE P: Unity and Diversity in a tRNA Processing RibozymeHIERARCHY AND DYNAMICS OF RNA FOLDINGMECHANISTIC ASPECTS OF ENZYMATIC CATALYSIS: Lessons from Comparison of RNA and Protein EnzymesMechanisms of Site-Specific RecombinationNew Insight into Site-Specific Recombination from Flp Recombinase-DNA StructuresA Structural View of Cre-loxP Site-Specific RecombinationMECHANISTIC ASPECTS OF ENZYMATIC CATALYSIS: Lessons from Comparison of RNA and Protein EnzymesDNA Polymerase γ, The Mitochondrial ReplicaseDNA Replication FidelityThe Small GTPase Superfamily in Plants: A Conserved Regulatory Module with Novel FunctionsHeterotrimeric G Protein–Coupled Signaling in PlantsSilver Spoons and Other Personal ReflectionsStructure-Function Relationships of the G Domain, a Canonical Switch MotifRhodopsin: Insights from Recent Structural StudiesGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsG PROTEIN MECHANISMS: Insights from Structural AnalysisMECHANISTIC ASPECTS OF ENZYMATIC CATALYSIS: Lessons from Comparison of RNA and Protein EnzymesFUNCTIONAL AND STRUCTURAL COMPLEXITY OF SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION VIA G-PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTORSMECHANISTIC ASPECTS OF ENZYMATIC CATALYSIS: Lessons from Comparison of RNA and Protein EnzymesRibozyme Structures and MechanismsRibozyme Structures and MechanismsMECHANISTIC ASPECTS OF ENZYMATIC CATALYSIS: Lessons from Comparison of RNA and Protein EnzymesCRYSTALLOGRAPHIC STRUCTURES OF THE HAMMERHEAD RIBOZYME: Relationship to Ribozyme Folding and CatalysisAminoacyl-tRNA SynthesisAminoacyl-tRNA SynthesisRNA RECOGNITION BY RNP PROTEINS DURING RNA PROCESSINGHIERARCHY AND DYNAMICS OF RNA FOLDINGHIERARCHY AND DYNAMICS OF RNA FOLDINGStructural Studies of RNase PEukaryotic Ribonuclease P: A Plurality of Ribonucleoprotein EnzymesRibozyme Structures and MechanismsRibozyme Structures and MechanismsRIBONUCLEASE P: Unity and Diversity in a tRNA Processing RibozymeMECHANISTIC ASPECTS OF ENZYMATIC CATALYSIS: Lessons from Comparison of RNA and Protein EnzymesStructural Studies of RNase PRIBONUCLEASE P: Unity and Diversity in a tRNA Processing RibozymeRIBONUCLEASE P: Unity and Diversity in a tRNA Processing RibozymeEukaryotic Ribonuclease P: A Plurality of Ribonucleoprotein EnzymesRIBONUCLEASE P: Unity and Diversity in a tRNA Processing RibozymeRibozyme Structures and MechanismsRibozyme Structures and MechanismsComparative Enzymology and Structural Biology of RNA Self-CleavageThe Structure-Function Dilemma of the Hammerhead RibozymeRibozyme Structures and MechanismsRibozyme Structures and MechanismsCRYSTALLOGRAPHIC STRUCTURES OF THE HAMMERHEAD RIBOZYME: Relationship to Ribozyme Folding and CatalysisMECHANISTIC ASPECTS OF ENZYMATIC CATALYSIS: Lessons from Comparison of RNA and Protein EnzymesComparative Enzymology and Structural Biology of RNA Self-CleavageCRYSTALLOGRAPHIC STRUCTURES OF THE HAMMERHEAD RIBOZYME: Relationship to Ribozyme Folding and CatalysisUnderstanding Nucleic Acid–Ion InteractionsComparative Enzymology and Structural Biology of RNA Self-CleavageThe Structure-Function Dilemma of the Hammerhead RibozymeRibozyme Structures and MechanismsRibozyme Structures and MechanismsStructural Motifs in RNARNA Folds: Insights from Recent Crystal StructuresCRYSTALLOGRAPHIC STRUCTURES OF THE HAMMERHEAD RIBOZYME: Relationship to Ribozyme Folding and CatalysisUnderstanding Nucleic Acid–Ion InteractionsComparative Enzymology and Structural Biology of RNA Self-CleavageThe Structure-Function Dilemma of the Hammerhead RibozymeRibozyme Structures and MechanismsRibozyme Structures and MechanismsIntegrating DNA: Transposases and Retroviral IntegrasesCRYSTALLOGRAPHIC STRUCTURES OF THE HAMMERHEAD RIBOZYME: Relationship to Ribozyme Folding and CatalysisMECHANISTIC ASPECTS OF ENZYMATIC CATALYSIS: Lessons from Comparison of RNA and Protein EnzymesRibozyme Structures and MechanismsRibozyme Structures and MechanismsAminoacyl-tRNA SynthesisOrigins of Specificity in Protein-DNA RecognitionMechanisms of Site-Specific RecombinationShufflons: Multiple Inversion Systems and IntegronsTARGET SITE SELECTION IN TRANSPOSITIONShelterin-Mediated Telomere ProtectionRegulation of Telomerase by Telomeric ProteinsMammalian ABC Transporters in Health and DiseaseTELOMERES AND THEIR CONTROLSTRUCTURE, FUNCTION, AND REPLICATION OF SACCHAROMYCES CEREVISIAE TELOMERESAnalysis of Genes, Transcripts, and Proteins via DNA LigationPharmacology of Antisense DrugsRNA Targeting Therapeutics: Molecular Mechanisms of Antisense Oligonucleotides as a Therapeutic PlatformCovalent Trapping of Protein-DNA ComplexesBiological Phosphoryl-Transfer Reactions: Understanding Mechanism and CatalysisRibozyme Structures and MechanismsRibozyme Structures and MechanismsIntegrating DNA: Transposases and Retroviral IntegrasesMECHANISTIC ASPECTS OF ENZYMATIC CATALYSIS: Lessons from Comparison of RNA and Protein EnzymesRibozyme Structures and MechanismsRibozyme Structures and MechanismsCRYSTALLOGRAPHIC STRUCTURES OF THE HAMMERHEAD RIBOZYME: Relationship to Ribozyme Folding and CatalysisThe Structure-Function Dilemma of the Hammerhead RibozymeCatalytic Strategies of the Hepatitis Delta Virus RibozymesCRYSTALLOGRAPHIC STRUCTURES OF THE HAMMERHEAD RIBOZYME: Relationship to Ribozyme Folding and CatalysisCpG Motifs in Bacterial DNA and Their Immune EffectsSIMULATION OF DNA-NANOTUBE INTERACTIONSThe Papillomavirus E2 Proteins: Structure, Function, and BiologyCell Mechanics: Mechanical Response, Cell Adhesion, and Molecular DeformationElectrostatic Mechanisms of DNA DeformationMINOR GROOVE-BINDING ARCHITECTURAL PROTEINS: Structure, Function, and DNA RecognitionCLUES AND CONSEQUENCES OF DNA BENDING IN TRANSCRIPTIONElectrostatic Mechanisms of DNA DeformationPROCESSING OF RECOMBINATION INTERMEDIATES BY THE RuvABC PROTEINSThe Role of Water in Protein-DNA RecognitionThe Bacterial RecA Protein and the Recombinational DNA Repair of Stalled Replication ForksThe Structure-Function Dilemma of the Hammerhead RibozymeAminoacyl-tRNA SynthesisBASE FLIPPINGThe Structure-Function Dilemma of the Hammerhead RibozymeComparative Enzymology and Structural Biology of RNA Self-CleavageCatalytic Strategies of the Hepatitis Delta Virus RibozymesActive Site Tightness and Substrate Fit in DNA ReplicationHydrogen Bonding, Base Stacking, and Steric Effects in DNA ReplicationComparative Enzymology and Structural Biology of RNA Self-CleavageThe Structure-Function Dilemma of the Hammerhead RibozymeChallenges in Enzyme Mechanism and EnergeticsRibozyme Structures and MechanismsRibozyme Structures and MechanismsCRYSTALLOGRAPHIC STRUCTURES OF THE HAMMERHEAD RIBOZYME: Relationship to Ribozyme Folding and CatalysisMECHANISTIC ASPECTS OF ENZYMATIC CATALYSIS: Lessons from Comparison of RNA and Protein EnzymesThe Structure-Function Dilemma of the Hammerhead RibozymeThe Structure-Function Dilemma of the Hammerhead RibozymeCRYSTALLOGRAPHIC STRUCTURES OF THE HAMMERHEAD RIBOZYME: Relationship to Ribozyme Folding and CatalysisIt Seems Like Only YesterdayON THE CHARACTERISTICS OF MIGRATION OF OLIGOMERIC DNA IN POLYACRYLAMIDE GELS AND IN FREE SOLUTIONDNA PrimasesRNA Targeting Therapeutics: Molecular Mechanisms of Antisense Oligonucleotides as a Therapeutic PlatformProgress in Antisense TechnologyRNA Targeting Therapeutics: Molecular Mechanisms of Antisense Oligonucleotides as a Therapeutic PlatformEngineering Synthetic Vectors for Improved DNA Delivery: Insights from Intracellular PathwaysLong-Range Interactions in Riboswitch Control of Gene ExpressionThe Structure-Function Dilemma of the Hammerhead RibozymeDirected Evolution of Nucleic Acid EnzymesChallenges in Enzyme Mechanism and EnergeticsIn Vitro Selection of Functional Nucleic AcidsMECHANISTIC ASPECTS OF ENZYMATIC CATALYSIS: Lessons from Comparison of RNA and Protein EnzymesThe Structure-Function Dilemma of the Hammerhead RibozymeDirected Evolution of Nucleic Acid EnzymesThe Structure-Function Dilemma of the Hammerhead RibozymeDirected Evolution of Nucleic Acid EnzymesMolecular Fitness Landscapes from High-Coverage Sequence ProfilingThe Structure-Function Dilemma of the Hammerhead RibozymeIn Vitro Selection of Functional Nucleic AcidsSTRUCTURAL INSIGHTS INTO TRANSLATIONAL FIDELITYCatalytic Strategies of the Hepatitis Delta Virus RibozymesMECHANISTIC ASPECTS OF ENZYMATIC CATALYSIS: Lessons from Comparison of RNA and Protein EnzymesSTRUCTURAL INSIGHTS INTO TRANSLATIONAL FIDELITYRibozyme Structures and MechanismsRibozyme Structures and MechanismsThe Structure-Function Dilemma of the Hammerhead RibozymeCatalytic Strategies of the Hepatitis Delta Virus RibozymesMECHANISTIC ASPECTS OF ENZYMATIC CATALYSIS: Lessons from Comparison of RNA and Protein EnzymesMECHANISTIC ASPECTS OF ENZYMATIC CATALYSIS: Lessons from Comparison of RNA and Protein EnzymesGroup II Intron Self-SplicingMECHANISTIC ASPECTS OF ENZYMATIC CATALYSIS: Lessons from Comparison of RNA and Protein EnzymesApplied EvolutionAptamers as TherapeuticsChemical Evolution as a Tool for Molecular DiscoveryAptamers: An Emerging Class of TherapeuticsIn Vitro Selection of Functional Nucleic AcidsAptamers as TherapeuticsAptamers: An Emerging Class of TherapeuticsIn Vitro Selection of Functional Nucleic AcidsDNA REPAIR MECHANISMS FOR THE RECOGNITION AND REMOVAL OF DAMAGED DNA BASESInitiation of Base Excision Repair: Glycosylase Mechanisms and StructuresBASE FLIPPINGDeterminants of Mutation Rate Variation in the Human GermlineDNA Replication FidelityStructural Mechanisms for Replicating DNA in EukaryotesDNA Replication FidelityStructure and Function of Hexameric HelicasesFrom Bioorganic Models to CellsSingle-Molecule RNA ScienceSITE-SPECIFIC DYNAMICS IN DNA:ExperimentsNITROXIDE SPIN-SPIN INTERACTIONS: Applications to Protein Structure and DynamicsSITE-SPECIFIC DYNAMICS IN DNA:ExperimentsCovalent Trapping of Protein-DNA ComplexesMINOR GROOVE-BINDING ARCHITECTURAL PROTEINS: Structure, Function, and DNA RecognitionCovalent Trapping of Protein-DNA ComplexesDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveCRYSTALLOGRAPHIC STRUCTURES OF THE HAMMERHEAD RIBOZYME: Relationship to Ribozyme Folding and CatalysisDirectional Recoil DetectionThe Bacterial Hsp90 Chaperone: Cellular Functions and Mechanism of ActionAntimicrobial Activity of Metals and MetalloidsThe Bacterial Hsp90 Chaperone: Cellular Functions and Mechanism of ActionFluid Dynamics of Respiratory Infectious DiseasesThe Contribution of Biophysics and Structural Biology to Current Advances in COVID-19Biomolecular Modeling and Simulation: A Prospering Multidisciplinary FieldBiomolecular Modeling and Simulation: A Prospering Multidisciplinary FieldFirst-Principles Insights into Plasmon-Induced CatalysisToxoplasma Mechanisms for Delivery of Proteins and Uptake of Nutrients Across the Host-Pathogen InterfaceChemical Mediators at the Bacterial-Fungal InterfaceHow Does the Ribosome Fold the Proteome?Electrochemistry of Single-Vesicle EventsReproductive Multitasking: The Female GametophyteExploiting Broad-Spectrum Disease Resistance in Crops: From Molecular Dissection to BreedingExploiting Broad-Spectrum Disease Resistance in Crops: From Molecular Dissection to BreedingExploiting Broad-Spectrum Disease Resistance in Crops: From Molecular Dissection to BreedingExploiting Broad-Spectrum Disease Resistance in Crops: From Molecular Dissection to BreedingExploiting Broad-Spectrum Disease Resistance in Crops: From Molecular Dissection to BreedingDry Aligning Dilute Active MatterBalancing Disturbance and Conservation in Agroecosystems to Improve Biological ControlInfluence of Nesting Characteristics on Health of Wild Bee CommunitiesUpdate on the Animal Models and Underlying Mechanisms for ZIKV-Induced MicrocephalyGenetic Predisposition to Childhood Cancer in the Genomic EraGenetic Predisposition to Childhood Cancer in the Genomic EraGenetic Predisposition to Childhood Cancer in the Genomic EraGenetic Predisposition to Childhood Cancer in the Genomic EraCancer Treatment in the Genomic EraMechanisms of Cotranslational Maturation of Newly Synthesized ProteinsChiral Plasmonic Nanostructures Enabled by Bottom-Up ApproachesLaser Desorption Combined with Laser Postionization for Mass SpectrometryRadical S-Adenosylmethionine Enzymes in Human Health and DiseaseNew Technologies in Gravitational-Wave DetectionBrachypodium distachyon and Setaria viridis: Model Genetic Systems for the GrassesMolecular Mechanisms in Genetically Defined Autoinflammatory Diseases: Disorders of Amplified Danger SignalingEpisodic and Electrical Nervous System Disorders Caused by Nonchannel GenesBehavior Genetics and the Domestication of AnimalsQuantum Interfaces Between Atomic and Solid-State SystemsWater and Energy InteractionsWater and Energy InteractionsPlant Nucleotide Sugar Formation, Interconversion, and Salvage by Sugar Recycling*Evolution of PhotosynthesisSex Chromosomes in Land PlantsIndustry, Environmental Policy, and Environmental OutcomesFeedbacks of Terrestrial Ecosystems to Climate ChangeRenewable Energy Futures: Targets, Scenarios, and PathwaysModels of Decision Making and Residential Energy UseAggresomes and Pericentriolar Sites of Virus Assembly: Cellular Defense or Viral Design?Aggresomes and Pericentriolar Sites of Virus Assembly: Cellular Defense or Viral Design?Aggresomes and Pericentriolar Sites of Virus Assembly: Cellular Defense or Viral Design?Identifying Microorganisms Involved in Specific Pathogen Suppression in SoilSafety of Virus-Resistant Transgenic Plants Two Decades After Their Introduction: Lessons from Realistic Field Risk Assessment StudiesIdentifying Microorganisms Involved in Specific Pathogen Suppression in SoilIdentifying Microorganisms Involved in Specific Pathogen Suppression in SoilIdentifying Microorganisms Involved in Specific Pathogen Suppression in SoilTell Me Again What It Is That You DoFerroelectric Epitaxial Thin Films for Integrated OpticsMicroscale Characterization of Mechanical PropertiesMicroscale Characterization of Mechanical PropertiesThree-Dimensional Atom-Probe Tomography: Advances and ApplicationsDefect–Domain Wall Interactions in Trigonal FerroelectricsMicroscale Characterization of Mechanical PropertiesSpiral Magnets as MagnetoelectricsAtomic-Level Simulation of Ferroelectricity in Oxides: Current Status and OpportunitiesFunctions of Site-Specific Histone Acetylation and DeacetylationFunctions of Site-Specific Histone Acetylation and DeacetylationThe tmRNA System for Translational Surveillance and Ribosome RescueCellular Responses to Viral Infection in Humans: Lessons from Epstein-Barr VirusImmunobiology of Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cell TransplantationCellular Responses to Viral Infection in Humans: Lessons from Epstein-Barr VirusCellular Responses to Viral Infection in Humans: Lessons from Epstein-Barr VirusCellular Responses to Viral Infection in Humans: Lessons from Epstein-Barr VirusImmunologically Active Autoantigens: The Role of Toll-Like Receptors in the Development of Chronic Inflammatory DiseaseIL-17 Family Cytokines and the Expanding Diversity of Effector T Cell LineagesBiology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Biology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Biology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Biology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Biology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Biology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Biology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Biology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Biology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Biology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Biology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)The Use of Push-Pull Strategies in Integrated Pest ManagementBiology and Evolution of AdelgidaeBiology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Biology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)The Use of Push-Pull Strategies in Integrated Pest ManagementThe Use of Push-Pull Strategies in Integrated Pest ManagementBiology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Biology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Biology of the Bed Bugs (Cimicidae)Current Status of the Myriapod Class Diplopoda (Millipedes): Taxonomic Diversity and PhylogenyCurrent Status of the Myriapod Class Diplopoda (Millipedes): Taxonomic Diversity and PhylogenyCurrent Status of the Myriapod Class Diplopoda (Millipedes): Taxonomic Diversity and PhylogenyCurrent Status of the Myriapod Class Diplopoda (Millipedes): Taxonomic Diversity and PhylogenyAMORPHOUS POROUS MIXED OXIDES: Sol-Gel Ways to a Highly Versatile Class of Materials and CatalystsAMORPHOUS POROUS MIXED OXIDES: Sol-Gel Ways to a Highly Versatile Class of Materials and CatalystsAMORPHOUS POROUS MIXED OXIDES: Sol-Gel Ways to a Highly Versatile Class of Materials and CatalystsHYDROGEN IN METALS: Microstructural AspectsMICROGELS: Old Materials with New ApplicationsPROGRESS IN MICROSTRUCTURED OPTICAL FIBERSMICROGELS: Old Materials with New ApplicationsHYDROGEN IN METALS: Microstructural AspectsMICROGELS: Old Materials with New ApplicationsMICROGELS: Old Materials with New ApplicationsPROGRESS IN MICROSTRUCTURED OPTICAL FIBERSPROGRESS IN MICROSTRUCTURED OPTICAL FIBERSFERROELASTIC DOMAIN STRUCTURE AND SWITCHING IN EPITAXIAL FERROELECTRIC THIN FILMSPOSITRON ANNIHILATION AS A METHOD TO CHARACTERIZE POROUS MATERIALSAMORPHOUS POROUS MIXED OXIDES: Sol-Gel Ways to a Highly Versatile Class of Materials and CatalystsBreak-Induced Replication and Recombinational Telomere Elongation in YeastRADIOLYTIC PROTEIN FOOTPRINTING WITH MASS SPECTROMETRY TO PROBE THE STRUCTURE OF MACROMOLECULAR COMPLEXESRADIOLYTIC PROTEIN FOOTPRINTING WITH MASS SPECTROMETRY TO PROBE THE STRUCTURE OF MACROMOLECULAR COMPLEXESSYMMETRY, FORM, AND SHAPE: Guiding Principles for Robustness in Macromolecular MachinesFUSION PORES AND FUSION MACHINES IN CA2+-TRIGGERED EXOCYTOSISRADIOLYTIC PROTEIN FOOTPRINTING WITH MASS SPECTROMETRY TO PROBE THE STRUCTURE OF MACROMOLECULAR COMPLEXESMECHANOTRANSDUCTION INVOLVING MULTIMODULAR PROTEINS: Converting Force into Biochemical SignalsSPINACH ON THE CEILING: A Theoretical Chemist's Return to BiologyRADIOLYTIC PROTEIN FOOTPRINTING WITH MASS SPECTROMETRY TO PROBE THE STRUCTURE OF MACROMOLECULAR COMPLEXESRADIOLYTIC PROTEIN FOOTPRINTING WITH MASS SPECTROMETRY TO PROBE THE STRUCTURE OF MACROMOLECULAR COMPLEXESRelating Protein Motion to CatalysisRADIOLYTIC PROTEIN FOOTPRINTING WITH MASS SPECTROMETRY TO PROBE THE STRUCTURE OF MACROMOLECULAR COMPLEXESMechanisms of Site-Specific RecombinationRADIOLYTIC PROTEIN FOOTPRINTING WITH MASS SPECTROMETRY TO PROBE THE STRUCTURE OF MACROMOLECULAR COMPLEXESLKB1-Dependent Signaling PathwaysLKB1-Dependent Signaling PathwaysNMR TECHNIQUES FOR VERY LARGE PROTEINS AND RNAS IN SOLUTIONNMR TECHNIQUES FOR VERY LARGE PROTEINS AND RNAS IN SOLUTIONNMR TECHNIQUES FOR VERY LARGE PROTEINS AND RNAS IN SOLUTIONRelating Protein Motion to CatalysisSYMMETRY, FORM, AND SHAPE: Guiding Principles for Robustness in Macromolecular MachinesLKB1-Dependent Signaling PathwaysLKB1-Dependent Signaling PathwaysAsparagine Synthetase ChemotherapyRIBOSOME DYNAMICS: Insights from Atomic Structure Modeling into Cryo-Electron Microscopy MapsAxonal Transport and Alzheimer's DiseaseNMR TECHNIQUES FOR VERY LARGE PROTEINS AND RNAS IN SOLUTIONSYMMETRY, FORM, AND SHAPE: Guiding Principles for Robustness in Macromolecular MachinesNMR TECHNIQUES FOR VERY LARGE PROTEINS AND RNAS IN SOLUTIONEXCITONS IN CONJUGATED OLIGOMER AGGREGATES, FILMS, AND CRYSTALSSTARK DECELERATION AND TRAPPING OF OH RADICALSSTARK DECELERATION AND TRAPPING OF OH RADICALSION PAIR DISSOCIATION: Spectroscopy and DynamicsGENETIC DISORDERS OF PROGRAMMED CELL DEATH IN THE IMMUNE SYSTEMINTESTINAL AND PULMONARY MUCOSAL T CELLS: Local Heroes Fight to Maintain the Status QuoMEASURING POPULATION HEALTH: A Review of IndicatorsMEASURING POPULATION HEALTH: A Review of IndicatorsMEASURING POPULATION HEALTH: A Review of IndicatorsMEASURING POPULATION HEALTH: A Review of IndicatorsMEASURING POPULATION HEALTH: A Review of IndicatorsMEASURING POPULATION HEALTH: A Review of IndicatorsPREVENTIVE CARE FOR CHILDREN IN THE UNITED STATES: Quality and BarriersGENETIC DISORDERS OF PROGRAMMED CELL DEATH IN THE IMMUNE SYSTEMMEASURING POPULATION HEALTH: A Review of IndicatorsSPEED, ROAD INJURY, AND PUBLIC HEALTHSPEED, ROAD INJURY, AND PUBLIC HEALTHMEASURING POPULATION HEALTH: A Review of IndicatorsPUBLIC REPORTING OF PROVIDER PERFORMANCE: Can Its Impact Be Made Greater?MULTIPLEXED PROTEIN ARRAY PLATFORMS FOR ANALYSIS OF AUTOIMMUNE DISEASESMULTIPLEXED PROTEIN ARRAY PLATFORMS FOR ANALYSIS OF AUTOIMMUNE DISEASESMULTIPLEXED PROTEIN ARRAY PLATFORMS FOR ANALYSIS OF AUTOIMMUNE DISEASESSTRESS, FATIGUE, HEALTH, AND RISK OF ROAD TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS AMONG PROFESSIONAL DRIVERS: The Contribution of Physical InactivitySTRESS, FATIGUE, HEALTH, AND RISK OF ROAD TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS AMONG PROFESSIONAL DRIVERS: The Contribution of Physical InactivityTHE POLITICS OF PUBLIC HEALTH POLICYAID TO PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Medicaid's Growing RoleAID TO PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Medicaid's Growing RoleMEASURING POPULATION HEALTH: A Review of IndicatorsTHE TORTUOUS JOURNEY OF A BIOCHEMIST TO IMMUNOLAND AND WHAT HE FOUND THEREAID TO PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Medicaid's Growing RoleAID TO PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Medicaid's Growing RoleSEVERE SEPSIS AND SEPTIC SHOCK: The Role of Gram-Negative BacteremiaSEVERE SEPSIS AND SEPTIC SHOCK: The Role of Gram-Negative BacteremiaSEVERE SEPSIS AND SEPTIC SHOCK: The Role of Gram-Negative BacteremiaProstatitis/Chronic Pelvic Pain SyndromePROTEASES IN PARASITIC DISEASESToward a Unified Theory of Renal ProgressionPATHOGENESIS OF NONIMMUNE GLOMERULOPATHIESThe Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) Privacy Rule: Implications for Clinical ResearchCeliac DiseaseToward a Unified Theory of Renal ProgressionPlant, Synthetic, and Endogenous Cannabinoids in MedicineToward a Unified Theory of Renal ProgressionThe Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) Privacy Rule: Implications for Clinical ResearchCardiotoxicity Induced by Chemotherapy and Antibody TherapyAvian Flu to Human InfluenzaBRAINSTEM CIRCUITS REGULATING GASTRIC FUNCTIONAN INTRODUCTION TO TRP CHANNELSAN INTRODUCTION TO TRP CHANNELSCARDIAC REGENERATION: Repopulating the HeartSIGNALING AND FUNCTION OF INSULIN-LIKE PEPTIDES IN INSECTSPROSTAGLANDINS AND OTHER EICOSANOIDS IN INSECTS: Biological SignificanceBRAINSTEM CIRCUITS REGULATING GASTRIC FUNCTIONTACHINIDAE: Evolution, Behavior, and EcologyDOPA DECARBOXYLASE: A Model Gene-Enzyme System for Studying Development, Behavior, and SystematicsSIGNALING AND FUNCTION OF INSULIN-LIKE PEPTIDES IN INSECTSCARDIAC REGENERATION: Repopulating the HeartDOPA DECARBOXYLASE: A Model Gene-Enzyme System for Studying Development, Behavior, and SystematicsROLE OF FXYD PROTEINS IN ION TRANSPORTFROM MICE TO MEN: Insights into the Insulin Resistance SyndromesRNA-Guided DNA Deletion in Tetrahymena: An RNAi-Based Mechanism for Programmed Genome RearrangementsConcerted and Birth-and-Death Evolution of Multigene FamiliesTOOLS FOR THE SIMULATION OF HARD HADRONIC COLLISIONSTHE ROLE OF PROTECTED AREAS IN CONSERVING BIODIVERSITY AND SUSTAINING LOCAL LIVELIHOODSTHE ROLE OF PROTECTED AREAS IN CONSERVING BIODIVERSITY AND SUSTAINING LOCAL LIVELIHOODSENVIRONMENTAL VALUESREGIONAL ATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION AND TRANSBOUNDARY AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENTPRIVATE-SECTOR PARTICIPATION IN THE WATER AND SANITATION SECTORREGIONAL ATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION AND TRANSBOUNDARY AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENTREGIONAL ATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION AND TRANSBOUNDARY AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENTPRIVATE-SECTOR PARTICIPATION IN THE WATER AND SANITATION SECTORARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBAL CHANGE: The Holocene RecordTHE ROLE OF PROTECTED AREAS IN CONSERVING BIODIVERSITY AND SUSTAINING LOCAL LIVELIHOODSTHE ROLE OF PROTECTED AREAS IN CONSERVING BIODIVERSITY AND SUSTAINING LOCAL LIVELIHOODSREGIONAL ATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION AND TRANSBOUNDARY AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENTENVIRONMENTAL VALUESREGIONAL ATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION AND TRANSBOUNDARY AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENTBIOGENESIS OF INNER MEMBRANE PROTEINS IN ESCHERICHIA COLIBIOGENESIS OF INNER MEMBRANE PROTEINS IN ESCHERICHIA COLIBIOGENESIS OF INNER MEMBRANE PROTEINS IN ESCHERICHIA COLICLINICAL AND TOXICOLOGICAL RELEVANCE OF CYP2C9: Drug-Drug Interactions and PharmacogeneticsPlant Disease: A Threat to Global Food SecurityPlant Disease: A Threat to Global Food SecurityPlant Disease: A Threat to Global Food SecurityHUMAN TASTE GENETICSRNA Silencing in Productive Virus InfectionsHUMAN TASTE GENETICSRNA Silencing in Productive Virus InfectionsBIG CAT GENOMICSTHE GENETIC BASIS FOR CARDIAC REMODELINGBIG CAT GENOMICSCOMPLEX GENETICS OF GLAUCOMA SUSCEPTIBILITYPOLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACID REGULATION OF GENES OF LIPID METABOLISMPOLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACID REGULATION OF GENES OF LIPID METABOLISMUPTAKE, LOCALIZATION, AND NONCARBOXYLASE ROLES OF BIOTINREDOX REGULATION BY INTRINSIC SPECIES AND EXTRINSIC NUTRIENTS IN NORMAL AND CANCER CELLSPOLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACID REGULATION OF GENES OF LIPID METABOLISMPOLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACID REGULATION OF GENES OF LIPID METABOLISMPOLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACID REGULATION OF GENES OF LIPID METABOLISMPOLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACID REGULATION OF GENES OF LIPID METABOLISMPOLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACID REGULATION OF GENES OF LIPID METABOLISMDIETARY FIBER: How Did We Get Where We Are?REDOX REGULATION BY INTRINSIC SPECIES AND EXTRINSIC NUTRIENTS IN NORMAL AND CANCER CELLSPOLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACID REGULATION OF GENES OF LIPID METABOLISMMolecular Mechanics and Dynamics of Leukocyte Recruitment During InflammationMETAL CATALYST DESIGN AND PREPARATION IN CONTROL OF DEACTIVATIONMETAL CATALYST DESIGN AND PREPARATION IN CONTROL OF DEACTIVATIONADHESION AND DE-ADHESION MECHANISMS AT POLYMER/METAL INTERFACES: Mechanistic Understanding Based on In Situ Studies of Buried InterfacesPOROUS ALUMINOPHOSPHATES :From Molecular Sieves to Designed Acid CatalystsELECTRON MICROSCOPY IN THE CATALYSIS OF ALKANE OXIDATION, ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL, AND ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SOURCESMETAL CATALYST DESIGN AND PREPARATION IN CONTROL OF DEACTIVATIONELECTRON MICROSCOPY IN THE CATALYSIS OF ALKANE OXIDATION, ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL, AND ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SOURCESMETAL CATALYST DESIGN AND PREPARATION IN CONTROL OF DEACTIVATIONCOMPOSITE MATERIALS FOR WIND POWER TURBINE BLADESCOMPOSITE MATERIALS FOR WIND POWER TURBINE BLADESCHEMICAL DESIGN AND IN SITU CHARACTERIZATION OF ACTIVE SURFACES FOR SELECTIVE CATALYSISPOROUS ALUMINOPHOSPHATES :From Molecular Sieves to Designed Acid CatalystsPOROUS ALUMINOPHOSPHATES :From Molecular Sieves to Designed Acid CatalystsSTRUCTURE, FUNCTION, AND FORMATION OF BIOLOGICAL IRON-SULFUR CLUSTERSPLANT-SPECIFIC CALMODULIN-BINDING PROTEINSENDOCYTOTIC CYCLING OF PM PROTEINSTHE STRUCTURAL BIOLOGY OF TYPE II FATTY ACID BIOSYNTHESISSTRUCTURAL STUDIES BY ELECTRON TOMOGRAPHY: From Cells to MoleculesMembrane-Protein Interactions in Cell Signaling and Membrane TraffickingPLANT-SPECIFIC CALMODULIN-BINDING PROTEINSPLANT-SPECIFIC CALMODULIN-BINDING PROTEINSMembrane-Protein Interactions in Cell Signaling and Membrane TraffickingNONTEMPLATE-DEPENDENT POLYMERIZATION PROCESSES: Polyhydroxyalkanoate Synthases as a ParadigmThe Structure-Function Dilemma of the Hammerhead RibozymePROTEIN FAMILIES AND THEIR EVOLUTION—A STRUCTURAL PERSPECTIVEMONITORING ENERGY BALANCE: Metabolites of Fatty Acid Synthesis as Hypothalamic SensorsNONSTATISTICAL DYNAMICS IN THERMAL REACTIONS OF POLYATOMIC MOLECULESULTRAFAST ELECTRON TRANSFER AT THE MOLECULE-SEMICONDUCTOR NANOPARTICLE INTERFACEULTRAFAST ELECTRON TRANSFER AT THE MOLECULE-SEMICONDUCTOR NANOPARTICLE INTERFACEULTRAFAST ELECTRON TRANSFER AT THE MOLECULE-SEMICONDUCTOR NANOPARTICLE INTERFACEFOURIER TRANSFORM INFRARED VIBRATIONAL SPECTROSCOPIC IMAGING: Integrating Microscopy and Molecular RecognitionAB INITIO QUANTUM CHEMICAL AND MIXED QUANTUM MECHANICS/MOLECULAR MECHANICS (QM/MM) METHODS FOR STUDYING ENZYMATIC CATALYSISQUANTUM MODE-COUPLING THEORY: Formulation and Applications to Normal and Supercooled Quantum LiquidsFOURIER TRANSFORM INFRARED VIBRATIONAL SPECTROSCOPIC IMAGING: Integrating Microscopy and Molecular RecognitionMETAL TO INSULATOR TRANSITIONS IN CLUSTERSMETAL TO INSULATOR TRANSITIONS IN CLUSTERSULTRAFAST ELECTRON TRANSFER AT THE MOLECULE-SEMICONDUCTOR NANOPARTICLE INTERFACEULTRAFAST ELECTRON TRANSFER AT THE MOLECULE-SEMICONDUCTOR NANOPARTICLE INTERFACEEMF AND HEALTHA LIFE COURSE APPROACH TO CHRONIC DISEASE EPIDEMIOLOGYCOMPETING DIETARY CLAIMS FOR WEIGHT LOSS: Finding the Forest Through Truculent TreesURBAN HEALTH: Evidence, Challenges, and DirectionsIMPACT OF NICOTINE REPLACEMENT THERAPY ON SMOKING BEHAVIORIMPACT OF NICOTINE REPLACEMENT THERAPY ON SMOKING BEHAVIORADVANCES IN RISK ASSESSMENT AND COMMUNICATIONADVANCES IN RISK ASSESSMENT AND COMMUNICATIONA LIFE COURSE APPROACH TO CHRONIC DISEASE EPIDEMIOLOGYPATIENT PERCEPTIONS OF THE QUALITY OF HEALTH SERVICESCOMPETING DIETARY CLAIMS FOR WEIGHT LOSS: Finding the Forest Through Truculent TreesIMPACT OF NICOTINE REPLACEMENT THERAPY ON SMOKING BEHAVIORCATERPILLER: A Novel Gene Family Important in Immunity, Cell Death, and DiseasesHOW NEUTROPHILS KILL MICROBESREGULATION OF LYMPHOID DEVELOPMENT, DIFFERENTIATION, AND FUNCTION BY THE NOTCH PATHWAYLESSONS IN ESTROGEN BIOLOGY FROM KNOCKOUT AND TRANSGENIC ANIMALSLUNG VASCULAR DEVELOPMENT: Implications for the Pathogenesis of Bronchopulmonary DysplasiaLUNG VASCULAR DEVELOPMENT: Implications for the Pathogenesis of Bronchopulmonary DysplasiaLUNG VASCULAR DEVELOPMENT: Implications for the Pathogenesis of Bronchopulmonary DysplasiaCHEMICAL PHYSIOLOGY OF BLOOD FLOW REGULATION BY RED BLOOD CELLS:CHEMICAL PHYSIOLOGY OF BLOOD FLOW REGULATION BY RED BLOOD CELLS:LUNG VASCULAR DEVELOPMENT: Implications for the Pathogenesis of Bronchopulmonary DysplasiaRole of Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Immunotherapy in Treating Multiple SclerosisRole of Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Immunotherapy in Treating Multiple SclerosisApplication of Microbial Genomic Science to Advanced TherapeuticsGene Therapy for Severe Combined ImmunodeficiencyRole of Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Immunotherapy in Treating Multiple SclerosisAromatase Inhibitors: Rationale and Use in Breast CancerAtrial Fibrillation: Modern Concepts and ManagementEVOLUTIONARY AND MECHANISTIC THEORIES OF AGINGEVOLUTIONARY AND MECHANISTIC THEORIES OF AGINGEGG DUMPING IN INSECTSEGG DUMPING IN INSECTSEGG DUMPING IN INSECTSNATURAL HISTORY OF PLAGUE: Perspectives from More than a Century of ResearchNATURAL HISTORY OF PLAGUE: Perspectives from More than a Century of ResearchNATURAL HISTORY OF PLAGUE: Perspectives from More than a Century of ResearchNATURAL HISTORY OF PLAGUE: Perspectives from More than a Century of ResearchFECAL RESIDUES OF VETERINARY PARASITICIDES: Nontarget Effects in the Pasture EnvironmentEVOLUTIONARY AND MECHANISTIC THEORIES OF AGINGTHE MEVALONATE PATHWAY AND THE SYNTHESIS OF JUVENILE HORMONE IN INSECTSBIOLOGY AND MANAGEMENT OF INSECT PESTS IN NORTH AMERICAN INTENSIVELY MANAGED HARDWOOD FOREST SYSTEMS,SYSTEMATICS, EVOLUTION, AND BIOLOGY OF SCELIONID AND PLATYGASTRID WASPSINVASIVE PHYTOPHAGOUS PESTS ARISING THROUGH A RECENT TROPICAL EVOLUTIONARY RADIATION: The Bactrocera dorsalis Complex of Fruit FliesMOSQUITO BEHAVIOR AND VECTOR CONTROLMECHANISMS OF HOPPERBURN: An Overview of Insect Taxonomy, Behavior, and PhysiologyTSETSE GENETICS: Contributions to Biology, Systematics, and Control of Tsetse FliesCHEMICAL ECOLOGY OF LOCUSTS AND RELATED ACRIDIDSTHE EVOLUTION OF MALE TRAITS IN SOCIAL INSECTSEGG DUMPING IN INSECTSEGG DUMPING IN INSECTSEGG DUMPING IN INSECTSEGG DUMPING IN INSECTSEGG DUMPING IN INSECTSEVOLUTIONARY AND MECHANISTIC THEORIES OF AGINGELECTROMAGNETIC FORM FACTORS OF THE NUCLEON AND COMPTON SCATTERINGMitochondria of ProtistsTRACING NOBLE GAS RADIONUCLIDES IN THE ENVIRONMENTChlamydomonas reinhardtii in the Landscape of PigmentsGRAVITATIONAL WAVE ASTRONOMYTHE NUCLEAR STRUCTURE OF HEAVY-ACTINIDE AND TRANS ACTINIDE NUCLEITHE NUCLEAR STRUCTURE OF HEAVY-ACTINIDE AND TRANS ACTINIDE NUCLEIThe Genetics of GeochemistryThe Genetics of GeochemistryMitochondria of ProtistsTHE NUCLEAR STRUCTURE OF HEAVY-ACTINIDE AND TRANS ACTINIDE NUCLEITHE NUCLEAR STRUCTURE OF HEAVY-ACTINIDE AND TRANS ACTINIDE NUCLEIThe Genetics of GeochemistryThe Genetics of GeochemistryThe Genetics of GeochemistryGRAVITATIONAL WAVE ASTRONOMYTHE NUCLEAR STRUCTURE OF HEAVY-ACTINIDE AND TRANS ACTINIDE NUCLEITHE NUCLEAR STRUCTURE OF HEAVY-ACTINIDE AND TRANS ACTINIDE NUCLEITHE NUCLEAR STRUCTURE OF HEAVY-ACTINIDE AND TRANS ACTINIDE NUCLEIThe Genetics of GeochemistryGRAVITATIONAL WAVE ASTRONOMYTHE NUCLEAR STRUCTURE OF HEAVY-ACTINIDE AND TRANS ACTINIDE NUCLEITRACING NOBLE GAS RADIONUCLIDES IN THE ENVIRONMENTThe Genetics of GeochemistryThe Genetics of GeochemistryMelanocytes and the Microphthalmia Transcription Factor NetworkGRAVITATIONAL WAVE ASTRONOMYMitochondria of ProtistsMobile Group II IntronsTHE NUCLEAR STRUCTURE OF HEAVY-ACTINIDE AND TRANS ACTINIDE NUCLEIRepair and Genetic Consequences of Endogenous DNA Base Damage in Mammalian CellsENERGY MANAGEMENT AND GLOBAL HEALTHPROSPECTS FOR CARBON CAPTURE AND STORAGE TECHNOLOGIESPLANT GENETIC RESOURCES FOR FOOD AND AGRICULTURE: Assessing Global AvailabilityASSESSING THE COSTS OF ELECTRICITYRibosomal Crystallography: Initiation, Peptide Bond Formation, and Amino Acid Polymerization are Hampered by AntibioticsJohne's Disease, Inflammatory Bowel Disease, and Mycobacterium paratuberculosisAnaerobic Microbial DehalogenationMolecular and Cellular Basis of Bartonella PathogenesisJohne's Disease, Inflammatory Bowel Disease, and Mycobacterium paratuberculosisJohne's Disease, Inflammatory Bowel Disease, and Mycobacterium paratuberculosisAnaerobic Microbial DehalogenationJohne's Disease, Inflammatory Bowel Disease, and Mycobacterium paratuberculosisJohne's Disease, Inflammatory Bowel Disease, and Mycobacterium paratuberculosisThe Ecology and Genetics of Microbial DiversityCOMPARATIVE PRIMATE GENOMICSPLANT GENOMICS: The Third WaveMEDICAL GENETICS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIESMEDICAL GENETICS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIESMEDICAL GENETICS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIESPLANT GENOMICS: The Third WaveMEDICAL GENETICS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIESMEDICAL GENETICS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIESGENETIC SCREENING: Carriers and Affected IndividualsPLANT VIRUS SATELLITE AND DEFECTIVE INTERFERING RNAS: New Paradigms for a New CenturyMICROBIAL DIVERSITY IN SOIL: Selection of Microbial Populations by Plant and Soil Type and Implications for Disease SuppressivenessPLANT VIRUS SATELLITE AND DEFECTIVE INTERFERING RNAS: New Paradigms for a New CenturyOcular Biomechanics and BiotransportTissue Growth and RemodelingMolecular MachinesFunctional Efficacy of Tendon Repair ProcessesTHERMAL TRANSPORT IN NANOFLUIDSSEMICONDUCTOR NANOWIRES AND NANOTUBESUNUSUAL PROPERTIES AND STRUCTURE OF CARBON NANOTUBESSELF-ASSEMBLED SEMICONDUCTOR QUANTUM DOTS: Fundamental Physics and Device ApplicationsSEMICONDUCTOR NANOWIRES AND NANOTUBESUNUSUAL PROPERTIES AND STRUCTURE OF CARBON NANOTUBESMODELING AND SIMULATION OF BIOMATERIALSTHERMAL TRANSPORT IN NANOFLUIDSTHERMAL TRANSPORT IN NANOFLUIDSNUTRITION AND CANCER PREVENTION: A Multidisciplinary Perspective on Human TrialsENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS THAT INCREASE THE FOOD INTAKE AND CONSUMPTION VOLUME OF UNKNOWING CONSUMERSDEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS AND FACTORS INFLUENCING THE SYNTHESIS AND STATUS OF ASCORBIC ACID IN THE PIGVITAMIN B12 DEFICIENCY AS A WORLDWIDE PROBLEMAMERICA'S OBESITY: Conflicting Public Policies, Industrial Economic Development, and Unintended Human ConsequencesAMERICA'S OBESITY: Conflicting Public Policies, Industrial Economic Development, and Unintended Human ConsequencesTHE CRITICAL ROLE OF THE MELANOCORTIN SYSTEM IN THE CONTROL OF ENERGY BALANCETHE CRITICAL ROLE OF THE MELANOCORTIN SYSTEM IN THE CONTROL OF ENERGY BALANCEZINC AND THE RISK FOR INFECTIOUS DISEASEVITAMIN B12 DEFICIENCY AS A WORLDWIDE PROBLEMREGULATION OF CATIONIC AMINO ACID TRANSPORT: The Story of the CAT-1 TransporterAMERICA'S OBESITY: Conflicting Public Policies, Industrial Economic Development, and Unintended Human ConsequencesAMERICA'S OBESITY: Conflicting Public Policies, Industrial Economic Development, and Unintended Human ConsequencesDEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS AND FACTORS INFLUENCING THE SYNTHESIS AND STATUS OF ASCORBIC ACID IN THE PIGAMERICA'S OBESITY: Conflicting Public Policies, Industrial Economic Development, and Unintended Human ConsequencesAMERICA'S OBESITY: Conflicting Public Policies, Industrial Economic Development, and Unintended Human ConsequencesTHE CRITICAL ROLE OF THE MELANOCORTIN SYSTEM IN THE CONTROL OF ENERGY BALANCENUTRITION AND CANCER PREVENTION: A Multidisciplinary Perspective on Human TrialsBIOACTIVE COMPOUNDS IN NUTRITION AND HEALTH-RESEARCH METHODOLOGIES FOR ESTABLISHING BIOLOGICAL FUNCTION: The Antioxidant and Anti-inflammatory Effects of Flavonoids on AtherosclerosisCALCIUM AND BONE MINERAL METABOLISM IN CHILDREN WITH CHRONIC ILLNESSESAMERICA'S OBESITY: Conflicting Public Policies, Industrial Economic Development, and Unintended Human ConsequencesAMERICA'S OBESITY: Conflicting Public Policies, Industrial Economic Development, and Unintended Human ConsequencesVITAMIN B12 DEFICIENCY AS A WORLDWIDE PROBLEMTethering: Fragment-Based Drug DiscoveryInformation Content and Complexity in the High-Order Organization of DNATethering: Fragment-Based Drug DiscoveryDisease-Related Misassembly of Membrane ProteinsConformational Spread: The Propagation of Allosteric States in Large Multiprotein ComplexesMass Spectral Analysis in ProteomicsSpin Distribution and the Location of Protons in Paramagnetic ProteinsSpin Distribution and the Location of Protons in Paramagnetic ProteinsSpin Distribution and the Location of Protons in Paramagnetic ProteinsNuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy of High-Molecular-Weight ProteinsPyridoxal Phosphate Enzymes: Mechanistic, Structural, and Evolutionary ConsiderationsThe Molecular Mechanics of Eukaryotic TranslationNuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy of High-Molecular-Weight ProteinsUsing Protein Folding Rates to Test Protein Folding TheoriesInositol 1,4,5-Trisphosphate Receptors as Signal IntegratorsPalmitoylation of Intracellular Signaling Proteins: Regulation and FunctionIncorporation of Nonnatural Amino Acids Into ProteinsThe Sir2 Family of Protein DeacetylasesEukaryotic mRNA DecappingNuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy of High-Molecular-Weight ProteinsStructural Aspects of Ligand Binding to and Electron Transfer in Bacterial and Fungal P450sRoles of N-Linked Glycans in the Endoplasmic ReticulumIncorporation of Nonnatural Amino Acids Into ProteinsCRF and CRF Receptors: Role in Stress Responsivity and Other BehaviorsCRF and CRF Receptors: Role in Stress Responsivity and Other BehaviorsDARPP-32: An Integrator of NeurotransmissionCRF and CRF Receptors: Role in Stress Responsivity and Other BehaviorsCRF and CRF Receptors: Role in Stress Responsivity and Other BehaviorsThe Role of Oxidative Stress in CarcinogenesisMuscarinic Acetylcholine Receptor Knockout Mice: Novel Phenotypes and Clinical Implicationsβ-Adrenergic Receptors and Regulation of Energy Expenditure: A Family AffairCRF and CRF Receptors: Role in Stress Responsivity and Other BehaviorsTHE BIOLOGY OF XYLEM FLUID–FEEDING INSECT VECTORS OF XYLELLA FASTIDIOSA AND THEIR RELATION TO DISEASE EPIDEMIOLOGYFUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY OF IMMATURE PARASITOIDSPHYLOGENY AND BIOLOGY OF NEOTROPICAL ORCHID BEES (EUGLOSSINI)PHYLOGENY AND BIOLOGY OF NEOTROPICAL ORCHID BEES (EUGLOSSINI)BENJAMIN DANN WALSH: Pioneer Entomologist and Proponent of Darwinian TheoryFUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY OF IMMATURE PARASITOIDSFUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY OF IMMATURE PARASITOIDSPHYLOGENY AND BIOLOGY OF NEOTROPICAL ORCHID BEES (EUGLOSSINI)FUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY OF IMMATURE PARASITOIDSVENEZUELAN EQUINE ENCEPHALITISPOPULATION GENETICS OF AUTOCIDAL CONTROL AND STRAIN REPLACEMENTVENEZUELAN EQUINE ENCEPHALITISPHYLOGENY AND BIOLOGY OF NEOTROPICAL ORCHID BEES (EUGLOSSINI)VENEZUELAN EQUINE ENCEPHALITISTHE BIOLOGY OF XYLEM FLUID–FEEDING INSECT VECTORS OF XYLELLA FASTIDIOSA AND THEIR RELATION TO DISEASE EPIDEMIOLOGYFUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY OF IMMATURE PARASITOIDSBENJAMIN DANN WALSH: Pioneer Entomologist and Proponent of Darwinian TheoryFUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY OF IMMATURE PARASITOIDSHUMAN LICE AND THEIR CONTROLDEFENSIVE BEHAVIOR OF HONEY BEES: Organization, Genetics, and Comparisons with Other BeesFUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY OF IMMATURE PARASITOIDSDEFENSIVE BEHAVIOR OF HONEY BEES: Organization, Genetics, and Comparisons with Other BeesVENEZUELAN EQUINE ENCEPHALITISFUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY OF IMMATURE PARASITOIDSPHYLOGENY AND BIOLOGY OF NEOTROPICAL ORCHID BEES (EUGLOSSINI)RecA-Dependent Recovery of Arrested DNA Replication ForksHeparan Sulfate Core Proteins in Cell-Cell SignalingUnusual Life Style of Giant Chlorella VirusesRecA-Dependent Recovery of Arrested DNA Replication ForksGenetics of Lactase Persistence and Lactose IntolerancePatterns and Mechanisms of the Forest Carbon CycleTHE ROLE OF CARBON CYCLE OBSERVATIONS AND KNOWLEDGE IN CARBON MANAGEMENTEvaluating Uncertainties in Regional Photochemical Air Quality ModelingTHE ROLE OF CARBON CYCLE OBSERVATIONS AND KNOWLEDGE IN CARBON MANAGEMENTState of the World’s FisheriesFemtosecond Time-Resolved Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Polyatomic MoleculesA Salvage Pathway for Protein Synthesis: tmRNA and Trans-TranslationFemtosecond Time-Resolved Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Polyatomic MoleculesPhotoelectron Angular DistributionsPhotoelectron Angular DistributionsMaster Equation Models for Chemical Reactions of Importance in CombustionOptical Properties and Ultrafast Dynamics of Metallic NanocrystalsMaster Equation Models for Chemical Reactions of Importance in CombustionBacterial Biofilms: An Emerging Link to Disease PathogenesisThe Secret Lives of the Pathogenic MycobacteriaAssembly Dynamics of the Bacterial Cell Division Protein FtsZ: Poised at the Edge of StabilityThe Secret Lives of the Pathogenic MycobacteriaAssembly Dynamics of the Bacterial Cell Division Protein FtsZ: Poised at the Edge of StabilityIn Search of Perfection: Understanding the Highly Defect-Selective Chemistry of Anisotropic EtchingFemtosecond Time-Resolved Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Polyatomic MoleculesFemtosecond Time-Resolved Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Polyatomic MoleculesMolecular Pathogenicity of the Oral Opportunistic Pathogen Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitansFemtosecond Time-Resolved Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Polyatomic MoleculesA Salvage Pathway for Protein Synthesis: tmRNA and Trans-TranslationTransposable Elements in Filamentous FungiAssembly Dynamics of the Bacterial Cell Division Protein FtsZ: Poised at the Edge of StabilityA Salvage Pathway for Protein Synthesis: tmRNA and Trans-TranslationNatural Selection and the Emergence of a Mutation Phenotype: An Update of the Evolutionary Synthesis Considering Mechanisms that Affect Genome VariationThe Secret Lives of the Pathogenic MycobacteriaA Salvage Pathway for Protein Synthesis: tmRNA and Trans-TranslationLong-Range Resonance Energy Transfer in Molecular SystemsThe Secret Lives of the Pathogenic MycobacteriaQuantum Scattering Calculations on Chemical ReactionsQuantum Scattering Calculations on Chemical ReactionsMeasles Virus 1998–2002: Progress and ControversyDNA Mismatch Repair: Molecular Mechanisms and Biological FunctionNatural Selection and the Emergence of a Mutation Phenotype: An Update of the Evolutionary Synthesis Considering Mechanisms that Affect Genome VariationDNA Mismatch Repair: Molecular Mechanisms and Biological FunctionDNA Mismatch Repair: Molecular Mechanisms and Biological FunctionA Salvage Pathway for Protein Synthesis: tmRNA and Trans-TranslationDEVELOPMENT OF ALTERNATIVE STRATEGIES FOR MANAGEMENT OF SOILBORNE PATHOGENS CURRENTLY CONTROLLED WITH METHYL BROMIDEPATHOGEN SELF-DEFENSE: Mechanisms to Counteract Microbial AntagonismTHE ECOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF BIOFILM FORMATION BY PLANT-ASSOCIATED BACTERIAPATHOGEN SELF-DEFENSE: Mechanisms to Counteract Microbial AntagonismPATHOGEN SELF-DEFENSE: Mechanisms to Counteract Microbial AntagonismTHE THREAT OF PLANT PATHOGENS AS WEAPONS AGAINST U.S. CROPSPATHOGEN SELF-DEFENSE: Mechanisms to Counteract Microbial AntagonismTHE ECOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF BIOFILM FORMATION BY PLANT-ASSOCIATED BACTERIAPATHOGEN SELF-DEFENSE: Mechanisms to Counteract Microbial AntagonismPATHOGEN SELF-DEFENSE: Mechanisms to Counteract Microbial AntagonismPATHOGEN SELF-DEFENSE: Mechanisms to Counteract Microbial AntagonismPATHOGEN SELF-DEFENSE: Mechanisms to Counteract Microbial AntagonismPATHOGEN SELF-DEFENSE: Mechanisms to Counteract Microbial AntagonismPATHOGEN SELF-DEFENSE: Mechanisms to Counteract Microbial AntagonismPATHOGEN SELF-DEFENSE: Mechanisms to Counteract Microbial AntagonismProton Conduction Mechanisms at Low Degrees of Hydration in Sulfonic Acid–Based Polymer Electrolyte MembranesMaterials Design for the Next Generation Thermal Barrier CoatingsMaterials Design for the Next Generation Thermal Barrier CoatingsRecent Advances in Materials for Fuel CellsNon-Fluorinated Polymer Materials for Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel CellsMaterials Design for the Next Generation Thermal Barrier CoatingsMaterials Design for the Next Generation Thermal Barrier CoatingsScience and Technology of the Twenty-First Century: Synthesis, Properties, and Applications of Carbon NanotubesMaterials Design for the Next Generation Thermal Barrier CoatingsScience and Technology of the Twenty-First Century: Synthesis, Properties, and Applications of Carbon NanotubesUnderstanding Materials CompatibilityIRON STATUS AND NEURAL FUNCTIONINGNUTRITION IN THE PERIOPERATIVE PATIENTDIET AND NUTRITION IN POOR AND MINORITY COMMUNITIES IN THE UNITED STATES 100 YEARS AGOTROPHIC AND CYTOPROTECTIVE NUTRITION FOR INTESTINAL ADAPTATION, MUCOSAL REPAIR, AND BARRIER FUNCTIONCHALLENGES AND APPROACHES TO REDUCING FOODBORNE ILLNESSCHALLENGES AND APPROACHES TO REDUCING FOODBORNE ILLNESSNUTRITION IN THE PERIOPERATIVE PATIENTOptical Single Transporter Recording: Transport Kinetics in Microarrays of Membrane PatchesMechanisms of Alternative Pre-Messenger RNA SplicingFunctional Genomics of P450SThe Structural Basis of Large Ribosomal Subunit FunctionThe Structural Basis of Large Ribosomal Subunit FunctionProtein Analysis by Hydrogen Exchange Mass SpectrometryMolecular Recognition and Docking AlgorithmsSemisynthesis of Proteins by Expressed Protein LigationSemisynthesis of Proteins by Expressed Protein LigationBiology of the p21-Activated KinasesDynamics of Cell Surface Molecules During T Cell RecognitionA Genetic Approach to Mammalian Glycan FunctionThe Dynamics of Chromosome Organization and Gene RegulationFunctional Genomics of P450SMechanisms of Alternative Pre-Messenger RNA SplicingBiology of the p21-Activated KinasesMechanisms of Alternative Pre-Messenger RNA SplicingMechanisms of Alternative Pre-Messenger RNA SplicingThe Plant Cell CycleThe Dynamics of Chromosome Organization and Gene RegulationOptical Single Transporter Recording: Transport Kinetics in Microarrays of Membrane PatchesBiology of the p21-Activated KinasesMetabolomics in Systems BiologyThe Structural Basis of Large Ribosomal Subunit FunctionOptical Single Transporter Recording: Transport Kinetics in Microarrays of Membrane PatchesThe Role of Dynamics in Enzyme ActivityThe Enzymes, Regulation, and Genetics of Bile Acid SynthesisOptical Single Transporter Recording: Transport Kinetics in Microarrays of Membrane PatchesFunctional Genomics of P450SFunctional Genomics of P450SDynamics of Cell Surface Molecules During T Cell RecognitionHow Do Cells Know What They Want to Be When They Grow Up? Lessons from Epidermal Patterning in ArabidopsisPhospholipid-Based Signaling in PlantsThe Many Faces of Vitamin B12: Catalysis by Cobalamin-Dependent EnzymesThe Structural Basis of Large Ribosomal Subunit FunctionFunctional Genomics of P450SFunction and Structure of Complex II of the Respiratory ChainX-Ray Crystallographic Analysis of Lipid-Protein Interactions in the Bacteriorhodopsin Purple MembraneMetabolomics in Systems BiologyFunctional Genomics of P450SNitric Oxide: The Versatility of an Extensive Signal MoleculeMetabolomics in Systems BiologyOptical Single Transporter Recording: Transport Kinetics in Microarrays of Membrane PatchesMolecular Recognition and Docking AlgorithmsOptical Single Transporter Recording: Transport Kinetics in Microarrays of Membrane PatchesMolecular Recognition and Docking AlgorithmsCations as Hydrogen Bond Donors: A View of Electrostatic Interactions in DNAPhospholipid-Based Signaling in PlantsFunctional Genomics of P450SDynamics of Cell Surface Molecules During T Cell RecognitionDynamics of Cell Surface Molecules During T Cell RecognitionDynamics of Cell Surface Molecules During T Cell RecognitionThe Structural Basis of Large Ribosomal Subunit FunctionT Cell AnergyPositive and Negative Selection of T CellsThe Role of Drug Transporters at the Blood-Brain BarrierPoxviruses and Immune EvasionThe Biology of IgE and the Basis of Allergic DiseaseThe Biology of IgE and the Basis of Allergic DiseaseThe Biology of IgE and the Basis of Allergic DiseaseThe Biology of IgE and the Basis of Allergic DiseaseThe Biology of IgE and the Basis of Allergic DiseaseAlzheimer's Disease: Molecular Understanding Predicts Amyloid-Based TherapeuticsInnate Immune Responses to Microbial Poisons: Discovery and Function of the Toll-Like ReceptorsRegulation of TRP Channels via Lipid Second MessengersPhysiology of Gastric Enterochromaffin-Like CellsApplication of Microarray Technology in Environmental and Comparative PhysiologyStructure and Mechanism of Na,K-ATPase: Functional Sites and Their InteractionsG Protein-Coupled Receptor Rhodopsin: A ProspectusOrigins and Consequences of Mitochondrial Variation in Vertebrate MuscleTerminal Differentiation of Intercalated Cells: The Role of HensinThe Gastric Biology of Helicobacter pyloriThe Role of Exogenous Surfactant in the Treatment of Acute Lung InjuryAIDS-Related MalignanciesFunctional Genomics of the Paraoxonase (PON1) Polymorphisms: Effects on Pesticide Sensitivity, Cardiovascular Disease, and Drug MetabolismThe Current Status of Hematopoietic Cell TransplantationPathogenesis and Treatment of Graft-Versus-Host Disease After Bone Marrow TransplantPathogenesis and Treatment of Graft-Versus-Host Disease After Bone Marrow TransplantPharmacogenetics in Cancer TreatmentErectile DysfunctionStudying Cancer Families to Identify Kidney Cancer GenesThe Challenge and Potential of Childhood Immunization RegistriesThe Challenge and Potential of Childhood Immunization RegistriesThe Challenge and Potential of Childhood Immunization RegistriesThe Challenge and Potential of Childhood Immunization RegistriesHealth Issues of Air TravelPublic Health, GIS, and the InternetHealth Issues of Air TravelPublic Health, GIS, and the InternetPublic Health, GIS, and the InternetPOPULATION-LEVEL EFFECTS OF PESTICIDES AND OTHER TOXICANTS ON ARTHROPODSSIGNALING PATHWAYS AND PHYSIOLOGICAL FUNCTIONS OF DROSOPHILA MELANOGASTER FMRFAMIDE-RELATED PEPTIDESPublic Health, GIS, and the InternetPublic Health, GIS, and the InternetGRASSES AND GALL MIDGES: Plant Defense and Insect AdaptationMethodologic Advances and Ongoing Challenges in Designing Community-Based Health Promotion ProgramsPOPULATION-LEVEL EFFECTS OF PESTICIDES AND OTHER TOXICANTS ON ARTHROPODSCommunication with Substrate-Borne Signals in Small Plant-Dwelling InsectsPublic Health, GIS, and the InternetCommunication with Substrate-Borne Signals in Small Plant-Dwelling InsectsFeather Mites (Acari: Astigmata): Ecology, Behavior, and EvolutionTHE EVOLUTION OF ALTERNATIVE GENETIC SYSTEMS IN INSECTSSIGNALING PATHWAYS AND PHYSIOLOGICAL FUNCTIONS OF DROSOPHILA MELANOGASTER FMRFAMIDE-RELATED PEPTIDESThe Feline Genome ProjectThe Feline Genome ProjectThe Feline Genome ProjectThe Feline Genome ProjectPHYSICS OPPORTUNITIES AT NEUTRINO FACTORIESGenetic Approaches to Molecular and Cellular Cognition: A Focus on LTP and Learning and MemoryPHYSICS OPPORTUNITIES AT NEUTRINO FACTORIESGenetics of Sensory MechanotransductionPHYSICS OPPORTUNITIES AT NEUTRINO FACTORIESRecombination in Evolutionary GenomicsGenetic Approaches to Molecular and Cellular Cognition: A Focus on LTP and Learning and MemoryEvolution of the Indian Nuclear Power ProgramAppliance and Equipment Efficiency StandardsCarbonate Chemistry for Sequestering Fossil CarbonCarbonate Chemistry for Sequestering Fossil CarbonCarbonate Chemistry for Sequestering Fossil CarbonThe Evolution of an Energy Analyst: Some Personal ReflectionsCarbonate Chemistry for Sequestering Fossil CarbonThe Evolution of an Energy Analyst: Some Personal ReflectionsSTUDIES OF POLYMER SURFACES BY SUM FREQUENCY GENERATION VIBRATIONAL SPECTROSCOPYMicrobial Degradation of PolyhydroxyalkanoatesSCATTERING RESONANCES IN THE SIMPLEST CHEMICAL REACTIONGenome Remodeling in Ciliated ProtozoaELECTRONIC STRUCTURE AND CATALYSIS ON METAL SURFACESSCATTERING RESONANCES IN THE SIMPLEST CHEMICAL REACTIONBiofilms as Complex Differentiated CommunitiesSTUDIES OF POLYMER SURFACES BY SUM FREQUENCY GENERATION VIBRATIONAL SPECTROSCOPYSCANNING TUNNELING MICROSCOPY STUDIES OF THE ONE-DIMENSIONAL ELECTRONIC PROPERTIES OF SINGLE-WALLED CARBON NANOTUBESMicrobial Degradation of PolyhydroxyalkanoatesWhat are Bacterial Species?Microbial Degradation of PolyhydroxyalkanoatesSURFACE FEMTOCHEMISTRY: Observation and Quantum Control of Frustrated Desorption of Alkali Atoms from Noble MetalsQUANTUM MECHANICAL METHODS FOR ENZYME KINETICSThe Class Mesomycetozoea: A Heterogeneous Group of Microorganisms at the Animal-Fungal BoundaryHeavy Metal Mining Using MicrobesMechanisms of Solvent Tolerance in Gram-Negative BacteriaELECTRONIC STRUCTURE AND CATALYSIS ON METAL SURFACESSCATTERING RESONANCES IN THE SIMPLEST CHEMICAL REACTIONPoliovirus Cell Entry: Common Structural Themes in Viral Cell Entry PathwaysBacterial Chromosome SegregationTransition Metal Transport in YeastCommon Principles in Viral EntryBacterial Chromosome SegregationBIOLOGICAL CONTROL OF POSTHARVEST DISEASES OF FRUITSGENETICS OF MYELOID LEUKEMIASLINKAGE ANALYSIS IN PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS: The Emerging PictureMOLECULAR BASIS OF RECOGNITION BETWEEN PHYTOPHTHORA PATHOGENS AND THEIR HOSTSMOLECULAR MECHANISMS FOR GENOMIC DISORDERSHedgehog Signaling and Human DiseasePATENTING GENES AND GENETIC RESEARCH TOOLS: Good or Bad for Innovation?GENETICS OF MYELOID LEUKEMIASHUMAN MIGRATIONS AND POPULATION STRUCTURE: What We Know and Why it MattersHedgehog Signaling and Human DiseaseThe Application of Tandem Mass Spectrometry to Neonatal Screening for Inherited Disorders of Intermediary MetabolismHedgehog Signaling and Human DiseaseHedgehog Signaling and Human DiseaseCOMPARATIVE GENOMIC ANALYSIS OF PLANT-ASSOCIATED BACTERIAExtending the Time Scale in Atomistic Simulation of MaterialsExtending the Time Scale in Atomistic Simulation of MaterialsExtending the Time Scale in Atomistic Simulation of MaterialsExtending the Time Scale in Atomistic Simulation of MaterialsDNA Microarray Technology: Devices, Systems, and ApplicationsMolecular and Mesoscale Simulation Methods for Polymer MaterialsMicromechanics Simulations of FracturePhase-Field Models for Microstructure EvolutionExtending the Time Scale in Atomistic Simulation of MaterialsExtending the Time Scale in Atomistic Simulation of MaterialsREGULATION OF ENZYMES OF THE UREA CYCLE AND ARGININE METABOLISMFATTY ACID TRANSPORT ACROSS MEMBRANES: Relevance to Nutrition and Metabolic PathologyNUTRITIONAL IMPACT OF INTESTINAL HELMINTHIASIS DURING THE HUMAN LIFE CYCLECAROTENOID BIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSIONREGULATION OF ENZYMES OF THE UREA CYCLE AND ARGININE METABOLISMDIETARY CONJUGATED LINOLEIC ACID IN HEALTH: Physiological Effects and Mechanisms of ActionBODY COMPOSITION OF THE MALE AND FEMALE REFERENCE INFANTSDIETARY CONJUGATED LINOLEIC ACID IN HEALTH: Physiological Effects and Mechanisms of ActionFATTY ACID TRANSPORT ACROSS MEMBRANES: Relevance to Nutrition and Metabolic PathologyDIETARY CONJUGATED LINOLEIC ACID IN HEALTH: Physiological Effects and Mechanisms of ActionCAROTENOID BIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSIONDIETARY CONJUGATED LINOLEIC ACID IN HEALTH: Physiological Effects and Mechanisms of ActionIN VIVO KINETICS OF FOLATE METABOLISMHYDROXYLASE ENZYMES OF THE VITAMIN D PATHWAY: Expression, Function, and RegulationA NEW MOSS GENETICS: Targeted Mutagenesis in Physcomitrella patensDNA Replication in Eukaryotic CellsPrinciples and Biophysical Applications of Lanthanide-Based ProbesDNA Replication in Eukaryotic CellsPHYTOCHROMES CONTROL PHOTOMORPHOGENESIS BY DIFFERENTIALLY REGULATED, INTERACTING SIGNALING PATHWAYS IN HIGHER PLANTSTHE COMPLEX FATE OF α-KETOACIDSTHE LIPOXYGENASE PATHWAYComputational Cell Biology: Spatiotemporal Simulation of Cellular EventsThe Linkage Between Protein Folding and Functional Cooperativity: Two Sides of the Same Coin?Magnetic Resonance Studies of the Bacteriorhodopsin Pump CycleCatalytic Proficiency: The Unusual Case of OMP DecarboxylaseCatalytic Proficiency: The Unusual Case of OMP DecarboxylaseMagnetic Resonance Studies of the Bacteriorhodopsin Pump CycleCOMPLEX EVOLUTION OF PHOTOSYNTHESISActive Site Tightness and Substrate Fit in DNA ReplicationPHYTOCHROMES CONTROL PHOTOMORPHOGENESIS BY DIFFERENTIALLY REGULATED, INTERACTING SIGNALING PATHWAYS IN HIGHER PLANTSParamagnetic Resonance of Biological Metal CentersNONSELECTIVE CATION CHANNELS IN PLANTSNeuronal Ca2+/Calmodulin-Dependent Protein Kinase II: The Role of Structure and Autoregulation in Cellular FunctionCatalytic Proficiency: The Unusual Case of OMP DecarboxylaseCatalytic Proficiency: The Unusual Case of OMP DecarboxylaseNONSELECTIVE CATION CHANNELS IN PLANTSSingle-Particle Imaging of Macromolecules by Cryo-Electron MicroscopyRNA Editing by Adenosine Deaminases That Act on RNAHomogeneous Glycopeptides and Glycoproteins for Biological InvestigationMetabolism and the Control of Circadian RhythmsRhodopsin: Insights from Recent Structural StudiesMechanisms of Fast Protein FoldingParamagnetic Resonance of Biological Metal CentersFlow Cytometric Analysis of Ligand-Receptor Interactions and Molecular AssembliesABSCISSION, DEHISCENCE, AND OTHER CELL SEPARATION PROCESSESV(D)J Recombination: RAG Proteins, Repair Factors, and RegulationNONSELECTIVE CATION CHANNELS IN PLANTSMy Road to Biophysics: Picking Flowers on the Way to PhotosynthesisSHOOT AND FLORAL MERISTEM MAINTENANCE IN ARABIDOPSISRNA Editing by Adenosine Deaminases That Act on RNACHLORORESPIRATIONCatalytic Proficiency: The Unusual Case of OMP DecarboxylaseThe Bacterial RecA Protein and the Recombinational DNA Repair of Stalled Replication ForksCatalytic Proficiency: The Unusual Case of OMP DecarboxylaseSingle-Particle Imaging of Macromolecules by Cryo-Electron MicroscopyCHLORORESPIRATIONMagnetic Resonance Studies of the Bacteriorhodopsin Pump CycleTuberculosisSocioeconomic Status and Health: The Potential Role of Environmental Risk ExposureGambling and Related Mental Disorders: A Public Health AnalysisThe Public Health Impact of Alzheimer's Disease, 2000–2050: Potential Implication of Treatment AdvancesChallenges in Motor Vehicle SafetyOrigins and Functions of B-1 Cells with Notes on the Role of CD5Origins and Functions of B-1 Cells with Notes on the Role of CD5Neuroendocrine Regulation of ImmunityRegulation of CYP3A Gene Transcription by the Pregnane X ReceptorShort-Term Synaptic PlasticityG Proteins and Phototransductionβ-Defensins in Lung Host DefenseOvulation: New Dimensions and New Regulators of the Inflammatory-Like ResponseMechanisms of Iron Accumulation in Hereditary HemochromatosisG Proteins and Pheromone SignalingOvulation: New Dimensions and New Regulators of the Inflammatory-Like ResponseOvulation: New Dimensions and New Regulators of the Inflammatory-Like ResponseShort-Term Synaptic PlasticityAttention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder Across the LifespanImmune Reconstitution in Patients with HIV InfectionBiology and Management of Economically Important Lepidopteran Cereal Stem Borers in AfricaAlternatives to Methyl Bromide Treatments for Stored-Product and Quarantine InsectsAlternatives to Methyl Bromide Treatments for Stored-Product and Quarantine InsectsAlternatives to Methyl Bromide Treatments for Stored-Product and Quarantine InsectsAlternatives to Methyl Bromide Treatments for Stored-Product and Quarantine InsectsEconomic, Ecological, Food Safety, and Social Consequences of the Deployment of Bt Transgenic PlantsEcology and Behavior of First Instar Larval LepidopteraCan Generalist Predators be Effective Biocontrol Agents?Can Generalist Predators be Effective Biocontrol Agents?Invasions by Insect Vectors of Human DiseaseEconomic, Ecological, Food Safety, and Social Consequences of the Deployment of Bt Transgenic PlantsAlternatives to Methyl Bromide Treatments for Stored-Product and Quarantine InsectsAlternatives to Methyl Bromide Treatments for Stored-Product and Quarantine InsectsEconomic, Ecological, Food Safety, and Social Consequences of the Deployment of Bt Transgenic PlantsBiology and Management of Economically Important Lepidopteran Cereal Stem Borers in AfricaOmnivory in Terrestrial Arthropods: Mixing Plant and Prey DietsEcology and Behavior of First Instar Larval LepidopteraDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisRecombinational DNA Repair of Damaged Replication Forks in Escherichia coli: QuestionsTranslational Regulation and RNA Localization in Drosophila Oocytes and EmbryosDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisGenetic Analysis of Calmodulin and Its Targets in Saccharomyces cerevisiaeDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisAnimal Models of Tumor-Suppressor GenesDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisIdentification of Epilepsy Genes in Human and MouseHIGHLIGHTS OF THE SLD PHYSICS PROGRAM AT THE SLAC LINEAR COLLIDERDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisDisseminating the Genome: Joining, Resolving, and Separating Sister Chromatids During Mitosis and MeiosisFEDERAL FOSSIL FUEL SUBSIDIES AND GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS: A Case Study of Increasing Transparency for Fiscal PolicyENERGY CONSERVATION IN CHINESE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS: Progress and Opportunities in Design and PolicyFEDERAL FOSSIL FUEL SUBSIDIES AND GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS: A Case Study of Increasing Transparency for Fiscal PolicyGLOBAL ELECTRIC POWER REFORM, PRIVATIZATION, AND LIBERALIZATION OF THE ELECTRIC POWER INDUSTRY IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIESENERGY CONSERVATION IN CHINESE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS: Progress and Opportunities in Design and PolicyENERGY CONSERVATION IN CHINESE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS: Progress and Opportunities in Design and PolicyCARBON SINKS IN TEMPERATE FORESTSFEDERAL FOSSIL FUEL SUBSIDIES AND GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS: A Case Study of Increasing Transparency for Fiscal PolicyCARBON SINKS IN TEMPERATE FORESTSENERGY CONSERVATION IN CHINESE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS: Progress and Opportunities in Design and PolicyFEDERAL FOSSIL FUEL SUBSIDIES AND GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS: A Case Study of Increasing Transparency for Fiscal PolicyINDICATORS OF ENERGY USE AND CARBON EMISSIONS: Explaining the Energy Economy LinkInteraction of Bacterial Pathogens with Polarized EpitheliumPULSED EPR SPECTROSCOPY: Biological ApplicationsInteraction of Bacterial Pathogens with Polarized EpitheliumAntigenic Variation at the Infected Red Cell Surface in MalariaEARLY EVENTS IN RNA FOLDINGRATIOMETRIC SINGLE-MOLECULE STUDIES OF FREELY DIFFUSING BIOMOLECULESFAST PROTEIN DYNAMICS PROBED WITH INFRARED VIBRATIONAL ECHO EXPERIMENTSREACTIONS AND THERMOCHEMISTRY OF SMALL TRANSITION METAL CLUSTER IONSPOLYMER ADSORPTION–DRIVEN SELF-ASSEMBLY OF NANOSTRUCTURESRATIOMETRIC SINGLE-MOLECULE STUDIES OF FREELY DIFFUSING BIOMOLECULESImmune Checkpoints in Viral LatencyNovel Thiols of ProkaryotesLIGHT-EMITTING ELECTROCHEMICAL PROCESSESPOLYMER ADSORPTION–DRIVEN SELF-ASSEMBLY OF NANOSTRUCTURESAntigenic Variation at the Infected Red Cell Surface in MalariaHomology-Dependent Gene Silencing Mechanisms in FungiREACTIONS AND THERMOCHEMISTRY OF SMALL TRANSITION METAL CLUSTER IONSBacteriophage TherapyTIME-RESOLVED PHOTOELECTRON SPECTROSCOPY OF MOLECULES AND CLUSTERSNovel Thiols of ProkaryotesREACTIONS AND THERMOCHEMISTRY OF SMALL TRANSITION METAL CLUSTER IONSBIOMOLECULAR SOLID STATE NMR: Advances in Structural Methodology and Applications to Peptide and Protein FibrilsBIOMOLECULAR SOLID STATE NMR: Advances in Structural Methodology and Applications to Peptide and Protein FibrilsCROSSED-BEAM STUDIES OF NEUTRAL REACTIONS: State-Specific Differential Cross SectionsHomology-Dependent Gene Silencing Mechanisms in FungiPOLYMER ADSORPTION–DRIVEN SELF-ASSEMBLY OF NANOSTRUCTURESHomology-Dependent Gene Silencing Mechanisms in FungiHomology-Dependent Gene Silencing Mechanisms in FungiBacterial Gliding Motility: Multiple Mechanisms for Cell Movement over SurfacesREACTIONS AND THERMOCHEMISTRY OF SMALL TRANSITION METAL CLUSTER IONSPOLYMER ADSORPTION–DRIVEN SELF-ASSEMBLY OF NANOSTRUCTURESA NEW APPROACH TO DECODING LIFE: Systems BiologyUSHER SYNDROME: From Genetics to PathogenesisTHE ROLE OF POLYGALACTURONASE-INHIBITING PROTEINS (PGIPS) IN DEFENSE AGAINST PATHOGENIC FUNGIUSHER SYNDROME: From Genetics to PathogenesisMOLECULAR DETERMINANTS OF RHIZOSPHERE COLONIZATION BY PSEUDOMONASCongenital Disorders of GlycosylationThe Genomics and Genetics of Human Infectious Disease SusceptibilityUSHER SYNDROME: From Genetics to PathogenesisPrivacy and Confidentiality of Genetic Information: What Rules for the New Science?Privacy and Confidentiality of Genetic Information: What Rules for the New Science?Privacy and Confidentiality of Genetic Information: What Rules for the New Science?Privacy and Confidentiality of Genetic Information: What Rules for the New Science?New DNA Sequencing MethodsMicro- and Nanomechanics of the Cochlear Outer Hair CellSoft Lithography in Biology and BiochemistryDesign and Synthesis of Energetic MaterialsSoft Lithography in Biology and BiochemistryNew DNA Sequencing MethodsMechanisms Involved in Osteoblast Response to Implant Surface MorphologySoft Lithography in Biology and BiochemistryComputer Modeling and Simulation of Human MovementMechanisms Involved in Osteoblast Response to Implant Surface MorphologyRespiratory Fluid Mechanics and Transport ProcessesSoft Lithography in Biology and BiochemistryNew DNA Sequencing MethodsThe “Fetal Origins” Hypothesis: Challenges and Opportunities for Maternal and Child NutritionNUTRITIONAL MANAGEMENT OF MAINTENANCE DIALYSIS PATIENTS: Why Aren't We Doing Better?PERSPECTIVES ON NUTRITIONAL IRON DEFICIENCYVITAMIN A, INFECTION, AND IMMUNE FUNCTION*The “Fetal Origins” Hypothesis: Challenges and Opportunities for Maternal and Child NutritionProtein Folding Theory: From Lattice to All-Atom ModelsProtein Folding Theory: From Lattice to All-Atom ModelsCYTOKINESIS AND BUILDING OF THE CELL PLATE IN PLANTSPLANT MITOCHONDRIA AND OXIDATIVE STRESS: Electron Transport, NADPH Turnover, and Metabolism of Reactive Oxygen SpeciesAb Initio Protein Structure Prediction: Progress and ProspectsChanneling of Substrates and Intermediates in Enzyme-Catalyzed ReactionsENDOSPERM DEVELOPMENT: Cellularization and Cell Fate SpecificationPhotosystem II: The Solid Structural EraHistone AcetyltransferasesENDOSPERM DEVELOPMENT: Cellularization and Cell Fate SpecificationChanneling of Substrates and Intermediates in Enzyme-Catalyzed ReactionsMACRONUTRIENT UTILIZATION BY PHOTOSYNTHETIC EUKARYOTES AND THE FABRIC OF INTERACTIONSDivergent Evolution of Enzymatic Function: Mechanistically Diverse Superfamilies and Functionally Distinct SuprafamiliesMACRONUTRIENT UTILIZATION BY PHOTOSYNTHETIC EUKARYOTES AND THE FABRIC OF INTERACTIONSMACRONUTRIENT UTILIZATION BY PHOTOSYNTHETIC EUKARYOTES AND THE FABRIC OF INTERACTIONSCYTOKINESIS AND BUILDING OF THE CELL PLATE IN PLANTSVARIATIONS IN THE BIOSYNTHESIS OF SEED-STORAGE LIPIDSDEFENSIVE RESIN BIOSYNTHESIS IN CONIFERSPhotosystem II: The Solid Structural EraVARIATIONS IN THE BIOSYNTHESIS OF SEED-STORAGE LIPIDSRegulation of Phosphoinositide-Specific Phospholipase CProtein Folding Theory: From Lattice to All-Atom ModelsMACRONUTRIENT UTILIZATION BY PHOTOSYNTHETIC EUKARYOTES AND THE FABRIC OF INTERACTIONSMACRONUTRIENT UTILIZATION BY PHOTOSYNTHETIC EUKARYOTES AND THE FABRIC OF INTERACTIONSGUARD CELL SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONBiomolecular Simulations: Recent Developments in Force Fields, Simulations of Enzyme Catalysis, Protein-Ligand, Protein-Protein, and Protein-Nucleic Acid Noncovalent InteractionsDivergent Evolution of Enzymatic Function: Mechanistically Diverse Superfamilies and Functionally Distinct SuprafamiliesCYTOKINESIS AND BUILDING OF THE CELL PLATE IN PLANTSProtein Folding Theory: From Lattice to All-Atom ModelsPhotosystem II: The Solid Structural EraRegulation of G Protein–Initiated Signal Transduction in Yeast: Paradigms and PrinciplesMACRONUTRIENT UTILIZATION BY PHOTOSYNTHETIC EUKARYOTES AND THE FABRIC OF INTERACTIONSDivergent Evolution of Enzymatic Function: Mechanistically Diverse Superfamilies and Functionally Distinct SuprafamiliesCYTOKINESIS AND BUILDING OF THE CELL PLATE IN PLANTSMACRONUTRIENT UTILIZATION BY PHOTOSYNTHETIC EUKARYOTES AND THE FABRIC OF INTERACTIONSMACRONUTRIENT UTILIZATION BY PHOTOSYNTHETIC EUKARYOTES AND THE FABRIC OF INTERACTIONSENDOSPERM DEVELOPMENT: Cellularization and Cell Fate SpecificationMACRONUTRIENT UTILIZATION BY PHOTOSYNTHETIC EUKARYOTES AND THE FABRIC OF INTERACTIONSCYTOKINESIS AND BUILDING OF THE CELL PLATE IN PLANTSMACRONUTRIENT UTILIZATION BY PHOTOSYNTHETIC EUKARYOTES AND THE FABRIC OF INTERACTIONSMACRONUTRIENT UTILIZATION BY PHOTOSYNTHETIC EUKARYOTES AND THE FABRIC OF INTERACTIONSMACRONUTRIENT UTILIZATION BY PHOTOSYNTHETIC EUKARYOTES AND THE FABRIC OF INTERACTIONSCIRCADIAN RHYTHMS IN PLANTSENDOSPERM DEVELOPMENT: Cellularization and Cell Fate SpecificationVARIATIONS IN THE BIOSYNTHESIS OF SEED-STORAGE LIPIDSFUNCTION AND MECHANISM OF ORGANIC ANION EXUDATION FROM PLANT ROOTSCIRCADIAN RHYTHMS IN PLANTSCYTOKINESIS AND BUILDING OF THE CELL PLATE IN PLANTSTHE COHESION-TENSION MECHANISM AND THE ACQUISITION OF WATER BY PLANT ROOTSPhotosystem II: The Solid Structural EraMACRONUTRIENT UTILIZATION BY PHOTOSYNTHETIC EUKARYOTES AND THE FABRIC OF INTERACTIONSBiomolecular Simulations: Recent Developments in Force Fields, Simulations of Enzyme Catalysis, Protein-Ligand, Protein-Protein, and Protein-Nucleic Acid Noncovalent InteractionsPhotosystem II: The Solid Structural EraPhotosystem II: The Solid Structural EraChanneling of Substrates and Intermediates in Enzyme-Catalyzed ReactionsPhotosystem II: The Solid Structural EraGUARD CELL SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONCYTOKINESIS AND BUILDING OF THE CELL PLATE IN PLANTSConsumer Reports in Health Care: Do They Make a Difference?The Case for a Medicare Drug Coverage Benefit: A Critical Review of the Empirical EvidenceThe Public Health Impact of ObesityInnovations in Treatment for Drug Abuse: Solutions to a Public Health ProblemThe Burden of Illness of Cancer: Economic Cost and Quality of LifeAdministrative Data for Public Health Surveillance and PlanningPreventing Obesity in Children and AdolescentsManaged Care: A View from EuropeThe Burden of Illness of Cancer: Economic Cost and Quality of LifeInnovations in Treatment for Drug Abuse: Solutions to a Public Health ProblemManaged Care: A View from EuropeConsumer Reports in Health Care: Do They Make a Difference?Managed Care: A View from EuropeAdministrative Data for Public Health Surveillance and PlanningInteractions Between Monoamines, Glutamate, and GABA in Schizophrenia: New EvidenceProstanoid Receptors: Subtypes and SignalingCross-Presentation, Dendritic Cells, Tolerance and ImmunityRole of Estrogen Receptor Beta in Estrogen Action13C NMR of Intermediary Metabolism: Implications for Systemic PhysiologyAntifreeze and Ice Nucleator Proteins in Terrestrial ArthropodsAntifreeze and Ice Nucleator Proteins in Terrestrial ArthropodsAntifreeze and Ice Nucleator Proteins in Terrestrial ArthropodsPathophysiological Role of Cytokines in Congestive Heart FailureAdvances in the Treatment of Lupus NephritisBiomedical Ethics and the Withdrawal of Advanced Life SupportBiomedical Ethics and the Withdrawal of Advanced Life SupportNovel Platelet InhibitorsBiomedical Ethics and the Withdrawal of Advanced Life SupportCurrent Treatment Strategies for Chronic Hepatitis B and CBiomedical Ethics and the Withdrawal of Advanced Life SupportBiomedical Ethics and the Withdrawal of Advanced Life SupportRisk-Adjusted Surgical OutcomesHereditary Distal Renal Tubular Acidosis: New UnderstandingsMATING BEHAVIOR AND CHEMICAL COMMUNICATION IN THE ORDER HYMENOPTERAMATING BEHAVIOR AND CHEMICAL COMMUNICATION IN THE ORDER HYMENOPTERAGenetic Transformation Systems in InsectsCOLONY DISPERSAL AND THE EVOLUTION OF QUEEN MORPHOLOGY IN SOCIAL HYMENOPTERAGenetic Transformation Systems in InsectsBIOGEOGRAPHY AND COMMUNITY STRUCTURE OF NORTH AMERICAN SEED-HARVESTER ANTSBIOLOGICAL CONTROL OF LOCUSTS AND GRASSHOPPERSFOOD WEBS IN PHYTOTELMATA: “Bottom-Up” and “Top-Down” Explanations for Community StructureGenetic Transformation Systems in InsectsTESTS OF REPRODUCTIVE-SKEW MODELS IN SOCIAL INSECTSFOOD WEBS IN PHYTOTELMATA: “Bottom-Up” and “Top-Down” Explanations for Community StructureBIOGEOGRAPHY AND COMMUNITY STRUCTURE OF NORTH AMERICAN SEED-HARVESTER ANTSCOLONY DISPERSAL AND THE EVOLUTION OF QUEEN MORPHOLOGY IN SOCIAL HYMENOPTERACOLONY DISPERSAL AND THE EVOLUTION OF QUEEN MORPHOLOGY IN SOCIAL HYMENOPTERABIOLOGICAL CONTROL OF LOCUSTS AND GRASSHOPPERSGenetic Transformation Systems in InsectsCOLONY DISPERSAL AND THE EVOLUTION OF QUEEN MORPHOLOGY IN SOCIAL HYMENOPTERAGenetic Transformation Systems in InsectsGenetic Transformation Systems in InsectsCOLONY DISPERSAL AND THE EVOLUTION OF QUEEN MORPHOLOGY IN SOCIAL HYMENOPTERABIOLOGICAL CONTROL OF LOCUSTS AND GRASSHOPPERSINSECT BIODEMOGRAPHYCOURTSHIP IN DROSOPHILACOMPLEX TRAIT ANALYSIS IN THE MOUSE: The Strengths, The Limitations and The Promise Yet To ComeDNA MISMATCH REPAIR AND GENETIC INSTABILITYCOURTSHIP IN DROSOPHILACOURTSHIP IN DROSOPHILATHE SOS RESPONSE: Recent Insights into umuDC-Dependent Mutagenesis and DNA Damage ToleranceASSESSMENT OF BACTERIAL PATHOGENESIS BY ANALYSIS OF GENE EXPRESSION IN THE HOSTCOURTSHIP IN DROSOPHILAHigh-Energy Neutrino AstrophysicsCOURTSHIP IN DROSOPHILACOURTSHIP IN DROSOPHILAPOLYGENIC AND MULTIFACTORIAL DISEASE GENE ASSOCIATION IN MAN: Lessons from AIDSCOURTSHIP IN DROSOPHILAASSESSMENT OF BACTERIAL PATHOGENESIS BY ANALYSIS OF GENE EXPRESSION IN THE HOSTDNA MISMATCH REPAIR AND GENETIC INSTABILITYDevelopments in Rare Kaon Decay PhysicsGENETIC ANALYSIS OF BACTERIOPHAGE-ENCODED COCHAPERONINSHigh-Energy Neutrino AstrophysicsOPPORTUNITIES FOR POLLUTION PREVENTION AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY ENABLED BY THE CARBON DIOXIDE TECHNOLOGY PLATFORMENGINEERING-ECONOMIC ANALYSES OF AUTOMOTIVE FUEL ECONOMY POTENTIAL IN THE UNITED STATESOPPORTUNITIES FOR POLLUTION PREVENTION AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY ENABLED BY THE CARBON DIOXIDE TECHNOLOGY PLATFORMINDUSTRIAL SYMBIOSIS: Literature and TaxonomyOrigins, Evolution, and Diversification of ZooplanktonINDUSTRIAL SYMBIOSIS: Literature and TaxonomyThe Ecology of Tropical Asian Rivers and Streams in Relation to Biodiversity ConservationAfrican Cichlid Fishes: Model Systems for Evolutionary BiologyThe Grasses: A Case Study in MacroevolutionOPPORTUNITIES FOR POLLUTION PREVENTION AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY ENABLED BY THE CARBON DIOXIDE TECHNOLOGY PLATFORMThe Ecology of Tropical Asian Rivers and Streams in Relation to Biodiversity ConservationOPPORTUNITIES FOR POLLUTION PREVENTION AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY ENABLED BY THE CARBON DIOXIDE TECHNOLOGY PLATFORMThe Ecology of Tropical Asian Rivers and Streams in Relation to Biodiversity ConservationENGINEERING-ECONOMIC ANALYSES OF AUTOMOTIVE FUEL ECONOMY POTENTIAL IN THE UNITED STATESOPPORTUNITIES FOR POLLUTION PREVENTION AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY ENABLED BY THE CARBON DIOXIDE TECHNOLOGY PLATFORMENGINEERING-ECONOMIC ANALYSES OF AUTOMOTIVE FUEL ECONOMY POTENTIAL IN THE UNITED STATESENGINEERING-ECONOMIC ANALYSES OF AUTOMOTIVE FUEL ECONOMY POTENTIAL IN THE UNITED STATESOPPORTUNITIES FOR POLLUTION PREVENTION AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY ENABLED BY THE CARBON DIOXIDE TECHNOLOGY PLATFORMThe Ecology of Tropical Asian Rivers and Streams in Relation to Biodiversity ConservationOPPORTUNITIES FOR POLLUTION PREVENTION AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY ENABLED BY THE CARBON DIOXIDE TECHNOLOGY PLATFORMOrigins, Evolution, and Diversification of ZooplanktonTECHNOLOGIES SUPPORTIVE OF SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORTATIONINDUSTRIAL SYMBIOSIS: Literature and TaxonomyOPPORTUNITIES FOR POLLUTION PREVENTION AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY ENABLED BY THE CARBON DIOXIDE TECHNOLOGY PLATFORMINDUSTRIAL SYMBIOSIS: Literature and TaxonomyOrigins, Evolution, and Diversification of ZooplanktonThe Ecology of Tropical Asian Rivers and Streams in Relation to Biodiversity ConservationTHE POTENTIAL OF BIOMASS FUELS IN THE CONTEXT OF GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE: Focus on Transportation FuelsOPPORTUNITIES FOR POLLUTION PREVENTION AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY ENABLED BY THE CARBON DIOXIDE TECHNOLOGY PLATFORMOPPORTUNITIES FOR POLLUTION PREVENTION AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY ENABLED BY THE CARBON DIOXIDE TECHNOLOGY PLATFORMThe Evolutionary Ecology of Tolerance to Consumer DamageCAPACITY DEVELOPMENT FOR THE ENVIRONMENT: A View for the South, A View for the NorthOPPORTUNITIES FOR POLLUTION PREVENTION AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY ENABLED BY THE CARBON DIOXIDE TECHNOLOGY PLATFORMBiofilm Formation as Microbial DevelopmentOxygen Respiration by Desulfovibrio SpeciesOxygen Respiration by Desulfovibrio SpeciesThe Dynamics of Noble Gas—Halogen Molecules and ClustersThe Dynamics of Noble Gas—Halogen Molecules and ClustersOxygen Respiration by Desulfovibrio SpeciesNucleic Acid Transport in Plant-Microbe Interactions: The Molecules That Walk Through the WallsLegionella Pneumophila Pathogenesis: A Fateful Journey from Amoebae to MacrophagesPathogenicity Islands and the Evolution of MicrobesLegionella Pneumophila Pathogenesis: A Fateful Journey from Amoebae to MacrophagesThe Dynamics of Noble Gas—Halogen Molecules and ClustersRegulation of Carbon Catabolism in Bacillus SpeciesThe Dynamics of Noble Gas—Halogen Molecules and ClustersThe Dynamics of Noble Gas—Halogen Molecules and ClustersThe Development of Genetic Tools for Dissecting the Biology of Malaria ParasitesTheoretical Studies of Atomic-Scale Processes Relevant to Crystal GrowthPhytoplasma: Phytopathogenic MollicutesBiofilm Formation as Microbial DevelopmentThe Dynamics of Noble Gas—Halogen Molecules and ClustersLegionella Pneumophila Pathogenesis: A Fateful Journey from Amoebae to MacrophagesThe Dynamics of Noble Gas—Halogen Molecules and ClustersRegulation of Carbon Catabolism in Bacillus SpeciesQuantitative Atom-Atom Potentials from Rotational Tunneling: Their Extraction and Their UseRegulation of Carbon Catabolism in Bacillus SpeciesThe Dynamics of Noble Gas—Halogen Molecules and ClustersThe Dynamics of Noble Gas—Halogen Molecules and ClustersBiofilm Formation as Microbial DevelopmentBiofilm Formation as Microbial DevelopmentSemiclassical Calculation of Chemical Reaction Dynamics via Wavepacket Correlation FunctionsThe Dynamics of Noble Gas—Halogen Molecules and ClustersControl of Virulence and Pathogenicity Genes of Ralstonia Solanacearum by an Elaborate Sensory NetworkIron Metabolism: Iron Deficiency and Iron OverloadBioinformatics Tools for Whole GenomesHow Many Genes Can Make a Cell: The Minimal-Gene-Set ConceptA Century of Plant Pathology: A Retrospective View on Understanding Host-Parasite InteractionsDNA Helicases, Genomic Instability, and Human Genetic DiseaseDNA Helicases, Genomic Instability, and Human Genetic DiseaseHow Many Genes Can Make a Cell: The Minimal-Gene-Set ConceptA Century of Plant Pathology: A Retrospective View on Understanding Host-Parasite InteractionsControl of Virulence and Pathogenicity Genes of Ralstonia Solanacearum by an Elaborate Sensory NetworkBioinformatics Tools for Whole GenomesHow Many Genes Can Make a Cell: The Minimal-Gene-Set ConceptBioinformatics Tools for Whole GenomesBioinformatics Tools for Whole GenomesPublic Concern About GeneticsAntibody EngineeringDevice Innovation and Material Challenges at the Limits of CMOS TechnologyMicrofabricated Microneedles for Gene and Drug DeliveryCell Mechanics: Mechanical Response, Cell Adhesion, and Molecular DeformationThree-Dimensional Ultrasound ImagingIC-Compatible Polysilicon Surface MicromachiningWavelets in Temporal and Spatial Processing of Biomedical ImagesAntibody EngineeringIC-Compatible Polysilicon Surface MicromachiningAntibody EngineeringIn Vivo Near-Infrared SpectroscopyWavelets in Temporal and Spatial Processing of Biomedical ImagesAntibody EngineeringMicroengineering of Cellular InteractionsAntibody EngineeringElectrophysiological Modeling of Cardiac Ventricular Function: From Cell to OrganWavelets in Temporal and Spatial Processing of Biomedical ImagesPROTEIN AND AMINO ACID METABOLISM DURING AND AFTER EXERCISE AND THE EFFECTS OF NUTRITIONLeptin—Much More Than a Satiety SignalTHE HEALTH BENEFITS OF WINEDietary Fat and Breast CancerPROTEIN AND AMINO ACID METABOLISM DURING AND AFTER EXERCISE AND THE EFFECTS OF NUTRITIONRegulation of Metabolism and Body Fat Mass by LeptinPROTEIN AND AMINO ACID METABOLISM DURING AND AFTER EXERCISE AND THE EFFECTS OF NUTRITIONIntestinal Transport During Fasting and MalnutritionBiosynthesis of Vitamin B2 (Riboflavin)From Chick Nutrition to Nutrition PolicyAlcohol: Its Metabolism and Interaction With NutrientsYeast Homotypic Vacuole Fusion: A Window on Organelle Trafficking MechanismsTwo-Component Signal TransductionPLANT THIOREDOXIN SYSTEMS REVISITEDRegulation of Chromosome ReplicationRegulation of Chromosome ReplicationStructure and Function of Cytochrome bc ComplexesRegulation of Chromosome ReplicationGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsCyclooxygenases: Structural, Cellular, and Molecular BiologyAutophagy, Cytoplasm-to-Vacuole Targeting Pathway, and Pexophagy in Yeast and Mammalian CellsGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsDEVELOPMENT OF SYMMETRY IN PLANTSHelical Membrane Protein Folding, Stability, and EvolutionHelical Membrane Protein Folding, Stability, and EvolutionMechanisms And Control Of mRNA Decapping in Saccharomyces cerevisiaeAutophagy, Cytoplasm-to-Vacuole Targeting Pathway, and Pexophagy in Yeast and Mammalian CellsSpindle Assembly in Animal CellsCyclooxygenases: Structural, Cellular, and Molecular BiologyCyclooxygenases: Structural, Cellular, and Molecular BiologyCyclooxygenases: Structural, Cellular, and Molecular BiologyHelical Membrane Protein Folding, Stability, and EvolutionCyclooxygenases: Structural, Cellular, and Molecular BiologyGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsDEVELOPMENT OF SYMMETRY IN PLANTSAutophagy, Cytoplasm-to-Vacuole Targeting Pathway, and Pexophagy in Yeast and Mammalian CellsGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsMechanisms And Control Of mRNA Decapping in Saccharomyces cerevisiaeMechanisms And Control Of mRNA Decapping in Saccharomyces cerevisiaeMechanisms And Control Of mRNA Decapping in Saccharomyces cerevisiaeAminoacyl-tRNA SynthesisCoupling of Open Reading Frames by Translational BypassingCYTOSKELETAL PERSPECTIVES ON ROOT GROWTH AND MORPHOGENESISGTPase-Activating Proteins for Heterotrimeric G Proteins: Regulators of G Protein Signaling (RGS) and RGS-Like ProteinsSpindle Assembly in Animal CellsOral Health in the United States: The Post-Fluoride GenerationThe Interface of Genetics and Public Health: Research and Educational ChallengesThe Interface of Genetics and Public Health: Research and Educational ChallengesOral Health in the United States: The Post-Fluoride GenerationOral Health in the United States: The Post-Fluoride GenerationOral Health in the United States: The Post-Fluoride GenerationHealth Promotion in the City: A Review of Current Practice and Future Prospects in the United StatesThe Effects of Changing Weather on Public HealthThe Effects of Changing Weather on Public HealthHost-Pathogen Interactions in Emerging and Re-emerging Infectious Diseases: A Genomic Perspective of Tuberculosis, Malaria, Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection, Hepatitis B, and CholeraOral Health in the United States: The Post-Fluoride GenerationOral Health in the United States: The Post-Fluoride GenerationOral Health in the United States: The Post-Fluoride GenerationOral Health in the United States: The Post-Fluoride GenerationOral Health in the United States: The Post-Fluoride GenerationHost-Pathogen Interactions in Emerging and Re-emerging Infectious Diseases: A Genomic Perspective of Tuberculosis, Malaria, Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection, Hepatitis B, and CholeraThe Interface of Genetics and Public Health: Research and Educational ChallengesThe New Public Health LitigationHost-Pathogen Interactions in Emerging and Re-emerging Infectious Diseases: A Genomic Perspective of Tuberculosis, Malaria, Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection, Hepatitis B, and CholeraHost-Pathogen Interactions in Emerging and Re-emerging Infectious Diseases: A Genomic Perspective of Tuberculosis, Malaria, Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection, Hepatitis B, and CholeraOral Health in the United States: The Post-Fluoride GenerationReligion and Health: Public Health Research and PracticeOral Health in the United States: The Post-Fluoride GenerationCentral Role of Peroxisome Proliferator–Activated Receptors in the Actions of Peroxisome ProliferatorsThe Role of Chemokine Receptors in Primary, Effector, and Memory Immune ResponsesThe Role of Rho in G Protein-Coupled Receptor Signal TransductionIntracellular Ca2+ and Cl– Channel Activation in Secretory CellsIntracellular Ca2+ and Cl– Channel Activation in Secretory CellsThe Evolutionary Physiology of Animal Flight: Paleobiological and Present PerspectivesIntracellular Ca2+ and Cl– Channel Activation in Secretory CellsDiapauseThe Evolutionary Physiology of Animal Flight: Paleobiological and Present PerspectivesVariability in the Size, Composition, and Function of Insect Flight MusclesChloride Secretion by the Intestinal Epithelium: Molecular Basis and Regulatory AspectsDuctal Carcinoma In Situ of the BreastAge-Associated Increased Interleukin-6 Gene Expression, Late-Life Diseases, and FrailtyNew Horizons in the Treatment of Autoimmune Diseases: Immunoablation and Stem Cell TransplantationAge-Associated Increased Interleukin-6 Gene Expression, Late-Life Diseases, and FrailtyNew Horizons in the Treatment of Autoimmune Diseases: Immunoablation and Stem Cell TransplantationAcupuncture: An Evidence-Based Review of the Clinical LiteratureAnorexia and Bulimia NervosaAnorexia and Bulimia NervosaBacterial VaginosisAnorexia and Bulimia NervosaImpact of the Internet on Entomology Teaching and ResearchParasitic Mites of Honey Bees: Life History, Implications, and ImpactFunction and Morphology of the Antennal Lobe: New DevelopmentsParasitic Mites of Honey Bees: Life History, Implications, and ImpactThe Development and Evolution of Exaggerated Morphologies in InsectsHabitat Management to Conserve Natural Enemies of Arthropod Pests in AgricultureEvolutionary Ecology of Progeny Size in ArthropodsLife Systems of Polyphagous Arthropod Pests in Temporally Unstable Cropping SystemsEvolutionary Ecology of Progeny Size in ArthropodsInsect Pest Management in Tropical Asian Irrigated RiceMechanisms of Stationary Phase Mutation: A Decade of Adaptive MutationMechanisms of mRNA Surveillance in EukaryotesMechanisms of mRNA Surveillance in EukaryotesMechanisms of mRNA Surveillance in EukaryotesTWO-PARTICLE CORRELATIONS IN RELATIVISTIC HEAVY-ION COLLISIONSINCLUSIVE JET AND DIJET PRODUCTION AT THE TEVATRONLentivirus Replication and RegulationLentivirus Replication and RegulationLentivirus Replication and RegulationLentivirus Replication and RegulationLentivirus Replication and RegulationLentivirus Replication and RegulationLentivirus Replication and RegulationLentivirus Replication and RegulationLentivirus Replication and RegulationPROSPECTS FOR BUILDING A HYDROGEN ENERGY INFRASTRUCTUREPROSPECTS FOR BUILDING A HYDROGEN ENERGY INFRASTRUCTUREPROSPECTS FOR BUILDING A HYDROGEN ENERGY INFRASTRUCTUREHistorical Extinctions in the SeaHistorical Extinctions in the SeaHistorical Extinctions in the SeaHistorical Extinctions in the SeaAstrobiology: Exploring the Origins, Evolution, and Distribution of Life in the UniverseHistorical Extinctions in the SeaNUCLEAR POWER ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE: Challenges and OpportunitiesHistorical Extinctions in the SeaHistorical Extinctions in the SeaHistorical Extinctions in the SeaHistorical Extinctions in the SeaHistorical Extinctions in the SeaHistorical Extinctions in the SeaTHE ECONOMICS OF “WHEN” FLEXIBILITY IN THE DESIGN OF GREENHOUSE GAS ABATEMENT POLICIESHistorical Extinctions in the SeaPROSPECTS FOR BUILDING A HYDROGEN ENERGY INFRASTRUCTUREA REVIEW OF TECHNICAL CHANGE IN ASSESSMENT OF CLIMATE POLICYResistance of Hybrid Plants and Animals to Herbivores, Pathogens, and ParasitesAnalysis of Selection on Enzyme PolymorphismsHistorical Extinctions in the SeaEvolution of Eastern Asian and Eastern North American Disjunct Distributions in Flowering PlantsEvolution of Eastern Asian and Eastern North American Disjunct Distributions in Flowering PlantsNUCLEAR POWER ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE: Challenges and OpportunitiesEvolution of Eastern Asian and Eastern North American Disjunct Distributions in Flowering PlantsHistorical Extinctions in the SeaHARMFUL ALGAL BLOOMS: An Emerging Public Health Problem with Possible Links to Human Stress on the EnvironmentECONOMIC GROWTH, LIBERALIZATION, AND THE ENVIRONMENT: A Review of the Economic EvidenceFUEL CELLS: Reaching the Era of Clean and Efficient Power Generation in the Twenty-First CenturyEvolution of Eastern Asian and Eastern North American Disjunct Distributions in Flowering PlantsIONIC EFFECTS BEYOND POISSON-BOLTZMANN THEORYDNA Uptake in BacteriaCROSSED-BEAM STUDIES OF REACTION DYNAMICSContributions of Genome Sequencing to Understanding the Biology of Helicobacter pyloriThe Cytoskeleton of Trypanosomatid ParasitesAPPLICATIONS OF IMPULSIVE STIMULATED SCATTERING IN THE EARTH AND PLANETARY SCIENCESContributions of Genome Sequencing to Understanding the Biology of Helicobacter pyloriDENSITY FUNCTIONAL THEORY OF BIOLOGICALLY RELEVANT METAL CENTERSContributions of Genome Sequencing to Understanding the Biology of Helicobacter pyloriContributions of Genome Sequencing to Understanding the Biology of Helicobacter pyloriContributions of Genome Sequencing to Understanding the Biology of Helicobacter pyloriIONIC EFFECTS BEYOND POISSON-BOLTZMANN THEORYDENSITY FUNCTIONAL THEORY OF BIOLOGICALLY RELEVANT METAL CENTERSDENSITY FUNCTIONAL THEORY OF BIOLOGICALLY RELEVANT METAL CENTERSAPPLICATIONS OF IMPULSIVE STIMULATED SCATTERING IN THE EARTH AND PLANETARY SCIENCESViruses and ApoptosisCHEMICAL APPLICATIONS OF NEUTRON SCATTERINGCHEMICAL APPLICATIONS OF NEUTRON SCATTERINGCROSSED-BEAM STUDIES OF REACTION DYNAMICSDENSITY FUNCTIONAL THEORY OF BIOLOGICALLY RELEVANT METAL CENTERSCROWN GALL OF GRAPE: Biology and Disease ManagementTHE THREE DS OF PCR-BASED GENOMIC ANALYSIS OF PHYTOBACTERIA: Diversity, Detection, and Disease DiagnosisTHE THREE DS OF PCR-BASED GENOMIC ANALYSIS OF PHYTOBACTERIA: Diversity, Detection, and Disease DiagnosisTHE EVOLUTION OF ASEXUAL FUNGI: Reproduction, Speciation and ClassificationTHE THREE DS OF PCR-BASED GENOMIC ANALYSIS OF PHYTOBACTERIA: Diversity, Detection, and Disease DiagnosisUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsTelemedicine: Emerging e-medicineUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsTWO-DIMENSIONAL DOPANT PROFILING BY SCANNING CAPACITANCE MICROSCOPYUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsImaging Transgenic AnimalsImaging Transgenic AnimalsTelemedicine: Emerging e-medicineAirway Wall MechanicsAPPLICATIONS OF ULTRASOUND TO MATERIALS CHEMISTRYUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsMicrofabrication in Biology and MedicineUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsHEAT CONDUCTION IN NOVEL ELECTRONIC FILMSUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsAirway Wall MechanicsUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsTelemedicine: Emerging e-medicineImaging Transgenic AnimalsSCANNING SQUID MICROSCOPYUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsAPPLICATIONS OF ULTRASOUND TO MATERIALS CHEMISTRYUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsKELVIN PROBE FORCE MICROSCOPY OF MOLECULAR SURFACESImaging Transgenic AnimalsBiomechanics of Microcirculatory Blood PerfusionUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsUltrasound Processing and Computing: Review and Future DirectionsSURFACE ROUGHENING OF HETEROEPITAXIAL THIN FILMSDIETARY FACTORS IN HUMAN COLORECTAL CANCERREGULATION OF FATTY ACID OXIDATION IN SKELETAL MUSCLEGENETIC ENGINEERING OF PLANT LIPIDSDIETARY FACTORS IN HUMAN COLORECTAL CANCERDEVELOPMENT OF FOOD PREFERENCESPSYCHOSOCIAL CORRELATES OF DIETARY INTAKE: Advancing Dietary InterventionREGULATION OF GENE EXPRESSION BY DIETARY FATGENETIC ENGINEERING OF PLANT LIPIDSREGULATION OF FATTY ACID OXIDATION IN SKELETAL MUSCLEREGULATION OF FATTY ACID OXIDATION IN SKELETAL MUSCLEREGULATION OF FATTY ACID OXIDATION IN SKELETAL MUSCLEDIETARY FACTORS IN HUMAN COLORECTAL CANCERTHE MAMMALIAN LOW-DENSITY LIPOPROTEIN RECEPTOR FAMILYGENETIC ENGINEERING OF PLANT LIPIDSDIETARY FACTORS IN HUMAN COLORECTAL CANCEROBESITY: A Major Global Public Health ProblemPSYCHOSOCIAL CORRELATES OF DIETARY INTAKE: Advancing Dietary InterventionGENETIC ENGINEERING OF PLANT LIPIDSDIETARY FACTORS IN HUMAN COLORECTAL CANCERDIETARY FACTORS IN HUMAN COLORECTAL CANCERREGULATION OF FATTY ACID OXIDATION IN SKELETAL MUSCLEVITAMIN B12 DEFICIENCY IN THE ELDERLYREGULATION OF FATTY ACID OXIDATION IN SKELETAL MUSCLEMOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF VITAMIN E TRANSPORTDEVELOPMENT OF FOOD PREFERENCESSILICONCellular and Molecular Biology of the Aquaporin Water ChannelsLEAF DEVELOPMENT IN ANGIOSPERMSLEAF DEVELOPMENT IN ANGIOSPERMSLEAF DEVELOPMENT IN ANGIOSPERMSLEAF DEVELOPMENT IN ANGIOSPERMSTolerance and Specificity of Polyketide SynthasesTHE SHIKIMATE PATHWAYMOLECULAR AND CELLULAR ASPECTS OF THE ARBUSCULAR MYCORRHIZAL SYMBIOSISeIF4 Initiation Factors: Effectors of mRNA Recruitment to Ribosomes and Regulators of TranslationMOLECULAR AND CELLULAR ASPECTS OF THE ARBUSCULAR MYCORRHIZAL SYMBIOSISStructural Motifs in RNATetrahydropterin-Dependent Amino Acid HydroxylasesCRASSULACEAN ACID METABOLISM: Molecular GeneticsLEAF DEVELOPMENT IN ANGIOSPERMSLEAF DEVELOPMENT IN ANGIOSPERMSMULTIPROTEIN-DNA COMPLEXES IN TRANSCRIPTIONAL REGULATIONPHOSPHATE ACQUISITIONLEAF DEVELOPMENT IN ANGIOSPERMSSILICONLEAF DEVELOPMENT IN ANGIOSPERMSMOLECULAR AND CELLULAR ASPECTS OF THE ARBUSCULAR MYCORRHIZAL SYMBIOSISLEAF DEVELOPMENT IN ANGIOSPERMSPatient Outcomes Research Teams: Contribution to Outcomes and Effectiveness ResearchPatient Outcomes Research Teams: Contribution to Outcomes and Effectiveness ResearchPatient Outcomes Research Teams: Contribution to Outcomes and Effectiveness ResearchLessons in Environmental Health in the Twentieth CenturyUS Health Care: A Look Ahead to 2025Pharmacy Benefit Management Companies: Dimensions of PerformancePharmacy Benefit Management Companies: Dimensions of PerformancePharmacy Benefit Management Companies: Dimensions of PerformancePatient Outcomes Research Teams: Contribution to Outcomes and Effectiveness ResearchUS Health Care: A Look Ahead to 2025US Health Care: A Look Ahead to 2025US Health Care: A Look Ahead to 2025Personal Reflections on Occupational Health in the Twentieth Century: Spiraling to the FutureA Future for Epidemiology?REDOX REGULATION OF c-Ha-ras AND OSTEOPONTIN SIGNALING IN VASCULAR SMOOTH MUSCLE CELLS: Implications in Chemical AtherogenesisDEGRADATION OF CELL PROTEINS AND THE GENERATION OF MHC CLASS I-PRESENTED PEPTIDESREDOX REGULATION OF c-Ha-ras AND OSTEOPONTIN SIGNALING IN VASCULAR SMOOTH MUSCLE CELLS: Implications in Chemical AtherogenesisREDOX REGULATION OF c-Ha-ras AND OSTEOPONTIN SIGNALING IN VASCULAR SMOOTH MUSCLE CELLS: Implications in Chemical AtherogenesisCYCLINS AND CELL CYCLE CHECKPOINTSREDOX REGULATION OF c-Ha-ras AND OSTEOPONTIN SIGNALING IN VASCULAR SMOOTH MUSCLE CELLS: Implications in Chemical AtherogenesisREDOX REGULATION OF c-Ha-ras AND OSTEOPONTIN SIGNALING IN VASCULAR SMOOTH MUSCLE CELLS: Implications in Chemical AtherogenesisGENETIC DISEASES AND GENE KNOCKOUTS REVEAL DIVERSE CONNEXIN FUNCTIONSCELLULAR AND MOLECULAR BASIS FOR ELECTRICAL RHYTHMICITY IN GASTROINTESTINAL MUSCLESHEAT-SHOCK PROTEINS, MOLECULAR CHAPERONES, AND THE STRESS RESPONSE: Evolutionary and Ecological PhysiologyIONIC CONDUCTANCES IN GASTROINTESTINAL SMOOTH MUSCLES AND INTERSTITIAL CELLS OF CAJALSODIUM-COUPLED TRANSPORTERS FOR KREBS CYCLE INTERMEDIATESIONIC CONDUCTANCES IN GASTROINTESTINAL SMOOTH MUSCLES AND INTERSTITIAL CELLS OF CAJALCELLULAR AND MOLECULAR BASIS FOR ELECTRICAL RHYTHMICITY IN GASTROINTESTINAL MUSCLESCONTROVERSIAL ISSUES IN VERTEBRATE OLFACTORY TRANSDUCTIONBiology of Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease: Pathophysiology Relating to Medical and Surgical TreatmentInsights from the Study of Heart Rate VariabilityNew Transfusion Strategies: Red Cell SubstitutesThe Biology of Cystitis: Host and Bacterial FactorsCyclosporine Treatment of Glomerular DiseasesBiology of Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease: Pathophysiology Relating to Medical and Surgical TreatmentBiology of Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease: Pathophysiology Relating to Medical and Surgical TreatmentBiology of Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease: Pathophysiology Relating to Medical and Surgical TreatmentInsights from the Study of Heart Rate VariabilityCONGRUENCE AND CONTROVERSY: Toward a Higher-Level Phylogeny of DipteraCONGRUENCE AND CONTROVERSY: Toward a Higher-Level Phylogeny of DipteraINFLUENCE OF THE LARVAL HOST PLANT ON REPRODUCTIVE STRATEGIES OF CERAMBYCID BEETLESHYPERPARASITISM: Multitrophic Ecology and BehaviorADAPTIVE STRATEGIES OF EDAPHIC ARTHROPODSNUTRITION AND CULTURE OF ENTOMOPHAGOUS INSECTSEMERGING AND RESURGING VECTOR-BORNE DISEASESCONGRUENCE AND CONTROVERSY: Toward a Higher-Level Phylogeny of DipteraTHE ROLE OF STINGLESS BEES IN CROP POLLINATIONINFLUENCE OF THE LARVAL HOST PLANT ON REPRODUCTIVE STRATEGIES OF CERAMBYCID BEETLESINFLUENCE OF THE LARVAL HOST PLANT ON REPRODUCTIVE STRATEGIES OF CERAMBYCID BEETLESASSESSMENT OF THE APPLICATION OF BACULOVIRUSES FOR CONTROL OF LEPIDOPTERAINSECT P450 ENZYMESINFLUENCE OF THE LARVAL HOST PLANT ON REPRODUCTIVE STRATEGIES OF CERAMBYCID BEETLESASSESSMENT OF THE APPLICATION OF BACULOVIRUSES FOR CONTROL OF LEPIDOPTERAHYPERPARASITISM: Multitrophic Ecology and BehaviorASSESSMENT OF THE APPLICATION OF BACULOVIRUSES FOR CONTROL OF LEPIDOPTERAINSECT P450 ENZYMESEMERGING AND RESURGING VECTOR-BORNE DISEASESDENSITY-DEPENDENT PHYSIOLOGICAL PHASE IN INSECTSADAPTIVE STRATEGIES OF EDAPHIC ARTHROPODSDENSITY-DEPENDENT PHYSIOLOGICAL PHASE IN INSECTSINSECT P450 ENZYMESASSESSMENT OF THE APPLICATION OF BACULOVIRUSES FOR CONTROL OF LEPIDOPTERAALTERNATIVE SPLICING OF PRE-mRNA: Developmental Consequences and Mechanisms of RegulationALTERNATIVE SPLICING OF PRE-mRNA: Developmental Consequences and Mechanisms of RegulationALTERNATIVE SPLICING OF PRE-mRNA: Developmental Consequences and Mechanisms of RegulationTHE LEPTOTENE-ZYGOTENE TRANSITION OF MEIOSISTHE CRITICAL ROLE OF CHROMOSOME TRANSLOCATIONS IN HUMAN LEUKEMIASTHE DIVERSE AND DYNAMIC STRUCTURE OF BACTERIAL GENOMESMATING-TYPE GENE SWITCHING IN SACCHAROMYCES CEREVISIAEALTERNATIVE SPLICING OF PRE-mRNA: Developmental Consequences and Mechanisms of RegulationMATING-TYPE GENE SWITCHING IN SACCHAROMYCES CEREVISIAEACCELERATOR-DRIVEN SYSTEMS FOR NUCLEAR WASTE TRANSMUTATIONKINETOCHORES AND THE CHECKPOINT MECHANISM THAT MONITORS FOR DEFECTS IN THE CHROMOSOME SEGREGATION MACHINERYALZHEIMER'S DISEASE: Genetic Studies and Transgenic ModelsTHE LEPTOTENE-ZYGOTENE TRANSITION OF MEIOSISMOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF BACTERIOCIN EVOLUTIONKINETOCHORES AND THE CHECKPOINT MECHANISM THAT MONITORS FOR DEFECTS IN THE CHROMOSOME SEGREGATION MACHINERYKINETOCHORES AND THE CHECKPOINT MECHANISM THAT MONITORS FOR DEFECTS IN THE CHROMOSOME SEGREGATION MACHINERYKINETOCHORES AND THE CHECKPOINT MECHANISM THAT MONITORS FOR DEFECTS IN THE CHROMOSOME SEGREGATION MACHINERYKINETOCHORES AND THE CHECKPOINT MECHANISM THAT MONITORS FOR DEFECTS IN THE CHROMOSOME SEGREGATION MACHINERYCARBON AND CARBONATE METABOLISM IN COASTAL AQUATIC ECOSYSTEMSRECYCLING METALS FOR THE ENVIRONMENTRECYCLING METALS FOR THE ENVIRONMENTCARBON AND CARBONATE METABOLISM IN COASTAL AQUATIC ECOSYSTEMSBACTERIAL GROWTH EFFICIENCY IN NATURAL AQUATIC SYSTEMSBACTERIAL GROWTH EFFICIENCY IN NATURAL AQUATIC SYSTEMSFUTURE TECHNOLOGIES FOR ENERGY-EFFICIENT IRON AND STEEL MAKINGCARBON AND CARBONATE METABOLISM IN COASTAL AQUATIC ECOSYSTEMSVERTEBRATE HERBIVORES IN MARINE AND TERRESTRIAL ENVIRONMENTS: A Nutritional Ecology PerspectiveCARBON AND CARBONATE METABOLISM IN COASTAL AQUATIC ECOSYSTEMSRECYCLING METALS FOR THE ENVIRONMENTNANOCRYSTAL SUPERLATTICESROLE OF TIGHT JUNCTIONS IN ESTABLISHING AND MAINTAINING CELL POLARITYTHYMINE METABOLISM AND THYMINELESS DEATH IN PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTESTHYMINE METABOLISM AND THYMINELESS DEATH IN PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTESTHE LUTEINIZING HORMONE RECEPTORTHE ANTI-SIGMA FACTORSCOMPUTER SIMULATIONS WITH EXPLICIT SOLVENT: Recent Progress in the Thermodynamic Decomposition of Free Energies and in Modeling Electrostatic EffectsPROTEOLYTIC ACTIVITIES THAT MEDIATE APOPTOSISTHE ANTI-SIGMA FACTORSTHINKING ABOUT BACTERIAL POPULATIONS AS MULTICELLULAR ORGANISMSTHYMINE METABOLISM AND THYMINELESS DEATH IN PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTESTHE ANTI-SIGMA FACTORSCHEMICAL REACTION DYNAMICS BEYOND THE BORN-OPPENHEIMER APPROXIMATIONSPECTROSCOPY OF ATOMS AND MOLECULES IN LIQUID HELIUMTHYMINE METABOLISM AND THYMINELESS DEATH IN PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTESHOW DO ANIMAL DNA VIRUSES GET TO THE NUCLEUS?NANOCRYSTAL SUPERLATTICESAGING IN SACCHAROMYCES CEREVISIAEPROTEOLYTIC ACTIVITIES THAT MEDIATE APOPTOSISMOLECULES IN OPTICAL, ELECTRIC, AND MAGNETIC FIELDS: A Personal PerspectiveTHYMINE METABOLISM AND THYMINELESS DEATH IN PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTESNANOCRYSTAL SUPERLATTICESTHE PHYSIOLOGY OF PARATHYROID HORMONE-RELATED PROTEIN: An Emerging Role as a Developmental FactorTHYMINE METABOLISM AND THYMINELESS DEATH IN PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTESSPECTROSCOPY OF ATOMS AND MOLECULES IN LIQUID HELIUMCOOPERATIVE ORGANIZATION OF BACTERIAL COLONIES: From Genotype to MorphotypeNEW PERSPECTIVES ON MICROBIAL DEHALOGENATION OF CHLORINATED SOLVENTS: Insights from the FieldSPECTROSCOPY OF ATOMS AND MOLECULES IN LIQUID HELIUMCURRENT CONCEPTS OF ACTIVE DEFENSE IN PLANTSCURRENT CONCEPTS OF ACTIVE DEFENSE IN PLANTSHOMOSERINE LACTONE-MEDIATED GENE REGULATION IN PLANT-ASSOCIATED BACTERIAHOMOSERINE LACTONE-MEDIATED GENE REGULATION IN PLANT-ASSOCIATED BACTERIAGENETICS AND PHYSIOLOGY OF AFLATOXIN BIOSYNTHESISHOMOSERINE LACTONE-MEDIATED GENE REGULATION IN PLANT-ASSOCIATED BACTERIASPIN-DEPENDENT TRANSPORT AND LOW-FIELD MAGNETORESISTANCE IN DOPED MANGANITESPROCESSING AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PIEZOELECTRIC MATERIALS AND INTEGRATION INTO MICROELECTROMECHANICAL SYSTEMSTHE ROLE OF METASTABLE STATES IN POLYMER PHASE TRANSITIONS: Concepts, Principles, and Experimental ObservationsPROCESSING TECHNOLOGIES FOR FERROELECTRIC THIN FILMS AND HETEROSTRUCTURESBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSNUTRITIONAL AND HORMONAL REGULATION OF ENZYMES IN FAT SYNTHESIS: Studies of Fatty Acid Synthase and Mitochondrial Glycerol-3-Phosphate Acyltransferase Gene TranscriptionNUTRITIONAL AND HORMONAL REGULATION OF ENZYMES IN FAT SYNTHESIS: Studies of Fatty Acid Synthase and Mitochondrial Glycerol-3-Phosphate Acyltransferase Gene TranscriptionBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSCYCLIC AMP SIGNALING AND GENE REGULATIONBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSPERSONAL REFLECTIONS ON A GALVANIZING TRAILDIET, NUTRITION, AND PROSTATE CANCERNUTRITIONAL AND HORMONAL REGULATION OF ENZYMES IN FAT SYNTHESIS: Studies of Fatty Acid Synthase and Mitochondrial Glycerol-3-Phosphate Acyltransferase Gene TranscriptionNUTRITIONAL AND HORMONAL REGULATION OF ENZYMES IN FAT SYNTHESIS: Studies of Fatty Acid Synthase and Mitochondrial Glycerol-3-Phosphate Acyltransferase Gene TranscriptionNUTRITIONAL AND HORMONAL REGULATION OF ENZYMES IN FAT SYNTHESIS: Studies of Fatty Acid Synthase and Mitochondrial Glycerol-3-Phosphate Acyltransferase Gene TranscriptionBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSREDEFINING BODY COMPOSITION: Nutrients, Hormones, and Genes in Meat ProductionBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSDIET, NUTRITION, AND PROSTATE CANCERBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSNITROGEN CYCLING IN THE GUTDIET, NUTRITION, AND PROSTATE CANCERBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSDIETARY FRUCTANSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSDIETARY FRUCTANSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSBIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOCONVERSION OF CAROTENOIDSPLANT CELL WALL PROTEINSPHYTOREMEDIATIONTHE DNA REPLICATION FORK IN EUKARYOTIC CELLSABSCISIC ACID SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONLESSONS FROM SEQUENCING OF THE GENOME OF A UNICELLULAR CYANOBACTERIUM, SYNECHOCYSTIS SP. PCC6803PHOTOSYNTHETIC CYTOCHROMES c IN CYANOBACTERIA, ALGAE, AND PLANTSPHOTOSYNTHETIC CYTOCHROMES c IN CYANOBACTERIA, ALGAE, AND PLANTSNUCLEOCYTOPLASMIC TRANSPORT: The Soluble PhaseTHE STRUCTURE AND MECHANISM OF PROTEIN PHOSPHATASES: Insights into Catalysis and RegulationABSCISIC ACID SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONDESATURATION AND RELATED MODIFICATIONS OF FATTY ACIDSPLANT CELL WALL PROTEINSNUCLEOCYTOPLASMIC TRANSPORT: The Soluble PhasePHYTOREMEDIATIONPLANT CELL WALL PROTEINSASCORBATE AND GLUTATHIONE: Keeping Active Oxygen Under ControlMOLECULAR-GENETIC ANALYSIS OF PLANT CYTOCHROME P450-DEPENDENT MONOOXYGENASESABSCISIC ACID SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONMOLECULAR BIOLOGY OF CATION TRANSPORT IN PLANTSPLANT CELL WALL PROTEINSPHYTOREMEDIATIONPLANT CELL WALL PROTEINSABSCISIC ACID SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONABSCISIC ACID SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONABSCISIC ACID SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONABSCISIC ACID SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONPHOTOSYNTHETIC CYTOCHROMES c IN CYANOBACTERIA, ALGAE, AND PLANTSABSCISIC ACID SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONROLE OF SMALL G PROTEINS IN YEAST CELL POLARIZATION AND WALL BIOSYNTHESISABSCISIC ACID SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONDNA METHYLATION IN PLANTSMOLECULAR-GENETIC ANALYSIS OF PLANT CYTOCHROME P450-DEPENDENT MONOOXYGENASESPHYTOREMEDIATIONPHYTOREMEDIATIONABSCISIC ACID SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONPLANT CELL WALL PROTEINSSPATIO-TEMPORAL RESOLUTION OF EXOCYTOSIS FROM INDIVIDUAL CELLSEVOLUTION OF LIGHT-REGULATED PLANT PROMOTERSASCORBATE AND GLUTATHIONE: Keeping Active Oxygen Under ControlDESATURATION AND RELATED MODIFICATIONS OF FATTY ACIDSASCORBATE AND GLUTATHIONE: Keeping Active Oxygen Under ControlDESATURATION AND RELATED MODIFICATIONS OF FATTY ACIDSRNA LOCALIZATION IN DEVELOPMENTRNA LOCALIZATION IN DEVELOPMENTSTRUCTURE, DYNAMICS, AND FUNCTION OF CHROMATIN IN VITROASCORBATE AND GLUTATHIONE: Keeping Active Oxygen Under ControlMOLECULAR-GENETIC ANALYSIS OF PLANT CYTOCHROME P450-DEPENDENT MONOOXYGENASESEVOLUTION OF LIGHT-REGULATED PLANT PROMOTERSRNA LOCALIZATION IN DEVELOPMENTTHE USE OF 2H, 13C, 15N MULTIDIMENSIONAL NMR GTO STUDY THE STRUCTURE AND DYNAMICS OF PROTEINSPHOTOSYNTHETIC CYTOCHROMES c IN CYANOBACTERIA, ALGAE, AND PLANTSBIOSENSORS IN CHEMICAL SEPARATIONSDNA METHYLATION IN PLANTSPLANT CELL WALL PROTEINSDNA METHYLATION IN PLANTSDNA METHYLATION IN PLANTSTHE STRUCTURE AND MECHANISM OF PROTEIN PHOSPHATASES: Insights into Catalysis and RegulationPHYTOREMEDIATIONPHYTOREMEDIATIONMOLECULAR-GENETIC ANALYSIS OF PLANT CYTOCHROME P450-DEPENDENT MONOOXYGENASESABSCISIC ACID SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONPLANT CELL WALL PROTEINSDNA METHYLATION IN PLANTSMOLECULAR BIOLOGY OF CATION TRANSPORT IN PLANTSPREVENTING YOUTH VIOLENCE: What Works?PREVENTING YOUTH VIOLENCE: What Works?TOBACCO DEPENDENCE TREATMENTS: Review and ProspectusTOBACCO DEPENDENCE TREATMENTS: Review and ProspectusMANAGED CARE AND PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENTS: Who is Responsible for the Health of the Population?TOBACCO DEPENDENCE TREATMENTS: Review and ProspectusTOBACCO DEPENDENCE TREATMENTS: Review and ProspectusTOBACCO DEPENDENCE TREATMENTS: Review and ProspectusTOBACCO DEPENDENCE TREATMENTS: Review and ProspectusPUBLIC HEALTH IN CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPE AND THE ROLE OF ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTIONPUBLIC HEALTH IN CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPE AND THE ROLE OF ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTIONINSIGHTS FROM IN VIVO MODIFICATION OF ADRENERGIC RECEPTOR GENE EXPRESSIONPREDICTIVE VALUE OF IN VITRO MODEL SYSTEMS IN TOXICOLOGYCD40 AND CD154 IN CELL-MEDIATED IMMUNITYCD40 AND CD154 IN CELL-MEDIATED IMMUNITYTHE PHARMACOLOGY AND TOXICOLOGY OF POLYPHENOLIC-GLUTATHIONE CONJUGATESTHE PHARMACOLOGY AND TOXICOLOGY OF POLYPHENOLIC-GLUTATHIONE CONJUGATESTHE PHARMACOLOGY AND TOXICOLOGY OF POLYPHENOLIC-GLUTATHIONE CONJUGATESCANNABINOID RECEPTORS AND THEIR ENDOGENOUS AGONISTSFunctional Neuroimaging Studies of Depression: The Anatomy of MelancholiaSustainability of Transgenic Insecticidal Cultivars: Integrating Pest Genetics and EcologyNEW INSECTICIDES WITH ECDYSTEROIDAL AND JUVENILE HORMONE ACTIVITYPARASITES AND PATHOGENS OF MITESManipulating Natural Enemies By Plant Variety Selection and Modification: A Realistic Strategy?PARASITES AND PATHOGENS OF MITESSustainability of Transgenic Insecticidal Cultivars: Integrating Pest Genetics and EcologyNutritional Interactions in Insect-Microbial Symbioses: Aphids and Their Symbiotic Bacteria BuchneraPARASITES AND PATHOGENS OF MITESVIRAL TRANSACTIVATING PROTEINSA REVIEW OF GRAVITATIONAL WAVE DETECTORSHOST-PATHOGEN INTERACTIONS DURING ENTRY AND ACTIN-BASED MOVEMENT OF LISTERIA MONOCYTOGENESTERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEM FEEDBACKS TO GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGEThe Ecology of Interfaces: Riparian ZonesSpecies Turnover and the Regulation of Trophic StructureINTEGRATED ASSESSMENT MODELS OF GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGETERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEM FEEDBACKS TO GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGEThe Role of Hybridization and Introgression in the Diversification of AnimalsREGIONAL PHOTOCHEMICAL AIR QUALITY MODELING:Model Formulations, History, and State of the ScienceRENEWABLE ENERGY TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY FOR DEVELOPMENTToward an Integration of Landscape and Food Web Ecology: The Dynamics of Spatially Subsidized Food WebsSpecies Turnover and the Regulation of Trophic StructureSpecies Turnover and the Regulation of Trophic StructureAN ASSESSMENT OF WORLD HYDROCARBON RESOURCESINTEGRATED ASSESSMENT MODELS OF GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGEEvolutionary Genetics of Life CyclesCONTROL OF M-CURRENTTHEORETICAL STUDIES OF CHEMICAL DYNAMICS: Overview of Some Fundamental MechanismsRNA VIRUS MUTATIONS AND FITNESS FOR SURVIVALINFRARED AND RAMAN VIBRATIONAL OPTICAL ACTIVITY: Theoretical and Experimental AspectsCELLULAR AND MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF PULMONARY VASCULAR REMODELINGCHEMICAL ACTIVATORS OF SENSORY NEURONSCELL-CELL COMMUNICATION IN GRAM-POSITIVE BACTERIACYTOPLASMIC ATP-DEPENDENT REGULATION OF ION TRANSPORTERS AND CHANNELS: Mechanisms and MessengersCHEMICAL ACTIVATORS OF SENSORY NEURONSREGULATORS OF APOPTOSIS ON THE ROAD TO PERSISTENT ALPHAVIRUS INFECTIONSPECIFIC, NONGENOMIC ACTIONS OF STEROID HORMONESCELL-CELL COMMUNICATION IN GRAM-POSITIVE BACTERIACELLULAR AND MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF PULMONARY VASCULAR REMODELINGSTATE-RESOLVED COLLISION-INDUCED ELECTRONIC TRANSITIONSCHEMICAL ACTIVATORS OF SENSORY NEURONSCYTOPLASMIC ATP-DEPENDENT REGULATION OF ION TRANSPORTERS AND CHANNELS: Mechanisms and MessengersCELL-CELL COMMUNICATION IN GRAM-POSITIVE BACTERIACELL-CELL COMMUNICATION IN GRAM-POSITIVE BACTERIATIME-RESOLVED DYNAMICS OF PROTON TRANSFER IN PROTEINOUS SYSTEMSTIME-RESOLVED DYNAMICS OF PROTON TRANSFER IN PROTEINOUS SYSTEMSIN MY TIME: Scenes of Scientific LifeREGULATORS OF APOPTOSIS ON THE ROAD TO PERSISTENT ALPHAVIRUS INFECTIONCELLULAR AND MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF PULMONARY VASCULAR REMODELINGTIME-RESOLVED DYNAMICS OF PROTON TRANSFER IN PROTEINOUS SYSTEMSCONTROL OF M-CURRENTCYTOPLASMIC ATP-DEPENDENT REGULATION OF ION TRANSPORTERS AND CHANNELS: Mechanisms and MessengersCYTOPLASMIC ATP-DEPENDENT REGULATION OF ION TRANSPORTERS AND CHANNELS: Mechanisms and MessengersBEVERLY T. GALLOWAY: Visionary AdministratorBarley Yellow Dwarf VirusesMICROBIAL POPULATION DYNAMICS ON LEAVESPHOTOREFRACTIVE POLYMERSCHARACTERIZATION OF POLYMER SURFACES WITH ATOMIC FORCE MICROSCOPYBISTABLE CHOLESTERIC REFLECTIVE DISPLAYS: Materials and Drive SchemesBINDER REMOVAL FROM CERAMICSCHARACTERIZATION OF POLYMER SURFACES WITH ATOMIC FORCE MICROSCOPYROLE OF NUTRITION IN PREVENTION OF THE PROGRESSION OF RENAL DISEASEENERGY SOURCES AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE EXERCISING HORSEDEVELOPMENT AND BIOMEDICAL TESTING OF MILITARY OPERATIONAL RATIONSNUTRITION SCREENING IN OLD PEOPLE: Its Place in a Coherent Practice of Preventive Health CareINTRACELLULAR LIPID-BINDING PROTEINS AND THEIR GENESINTRACELLULAR LIPID-BINDING PROTEINS AND THEIR GENESDEVELOPMENT AND BIOMEDICAL TESTING OF MILITARY OPERATIONAL RATIONSENERGY SOURCES AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE EXERCISING HORSEDYNAMIC O-LINKED GLYCOSYLATION OF NUCLEAR AND CYTOSKELETAL PROTEINSDYNAMIC O-LINKED GLYCOSYLATION OF NUCLEAR AND CYTOSKELETAL PROTEINSTHE ATP SYNTHASE—A SPLENDID MOLECULAR MACHINETHE ATP SYNTHASE—A SPLENDID MOLECULAR MACHINEDYNAMIC O-LINKED GLYCOSYLATION OF NUCLEAR AND CYTOSKELETAL PROTEINSREPLICATION PROTEIN A: A Heterotrimeric, Single-Stranded DNA-Binding Protein Required for Eukaryotic DNA MetabolismREPLICATION PROTEIN A: A Heterotrimeric, Single-Stranded DNA-Binding Protein Required for Eukaryotic DNA MetabolismREGULATION OF PHOSPHOENOLPYRUVATE CARBOXYKINASE (GTP) GENE EXPRESSIONMOLECULAR BASIS FOR MEMBRANE PHOSPHOLIPID DIVERSITY: Why Are There So Many Lipids?G PROTEIN MECHANISMS: Insights from Structural AnalysisGENETICS OF ANGIOSPERM SHOOT APICAL MERISTEM DEVELOPMENTTHE MOLECULAR STRUCTURE OF CELL ADHESION MOLECULESREGULATION OF PHOSPHOENOLPYRUVATE CARBOXYKINASE (GTP) GENE EXPRESSIONMETABOLITE TRANSPORT ACROSS SYMBIOTIC MEMBRANES OF LEGUME NODULESSINGLE-PARTICLE TRACKING:Applications to Membrane DynamicsGIBBERELLIN BIOSYNTHESIS: Enzymes, Genes and Their RegulationOPTICAL DETECTION OF SINGLE MOLECULESBASIC MECHANISMS OF TRANSCRIPT ELONGATION AND ITS REGULATIONBASIC MECHANISMS OF TRANSCRIPT ELONGATION AND ITS REGULATIONPROTEIN FOLDING: The EndgameRIBOSOMES AND TRANSLATIONTHE ETHYLENE RESPONSE PATHWAY IN ARABIDOPSISADVANCED EPR SPECTROSCOPY ON ELECTRON TRANSFER PROCESSES IN PHOTOSYNTHESIS AND BIOMIMETIC MODEL SYSTEMSDYNAMIC O-LINKED GLYCOSYLATION OF NUCLEAR AND CYTOSKELETAL PROTEINSADVANCED EPR SPECTROSCOPY ON ELECTRON TRANSFER PROCESSES IN PHOTOSYNTHESIS AND BIOMIMETIC MODEL SYSTEMSADVANCED EPR SPECTROSCOPY ON ELECTRON TRANSFER PROCESSES IN PHOTOSYNTHESIS AND BIOMIMETIC MODEL SYSTEMSPROTEIN FOLDING: The EndgameALTERNATIVE OXIDASE: From Gene to FunctionOPTICAL DETECTION OF SINGLE MOLECULESRIBOSOMES AND TRANSLATIONBASIC MECHANISMS OF TRANSCRIPT ELONGATION AND ITS REGULATIONSTRUCTURE-BASED PERSPECTIVES ON B12-DEPENDENT ENZYMESBASIC MECHANISMS OF TRANSCRIPT ELONGATION AND ITS REGULATIONBASIC MECHANISMS OF TRANSCRIPT ELONGATION AND ITS REGULATIONBASIC MECHANISMS OF TRANSCRIPT ELONGATION AND ITS REGULATIONREGULATION OF EUKARYOTIC PHOSPHATIDYLINOSITOL-SPECIFIC PHOSPHOLIPASE C AND PHOSPHOLIPASE DFOOD SAFETY REGULATION:Reforming the Delaney ClauseFOOD SAFETY REGULATION:Reforming the Delaney ClauseMORAL AND POLICY ISSUES IN LONG-ACTING CONTRACEPTIONREINVENTING PUBLIC HEALTHREINVENTING PUBLIC HEALTHSchool-Based Health Clinics: Remaining Viable in a Changing Health Care Delivery SystemREINVENTING PUBLIC HEALTHCAPTURE AND PROCESSING OF EXOGENOUS ANTIGENS FOR PRESENTATION ON MHC MOLECULESCAPTURE AND PROCESSING OF EXOGENOUS ANTIGENS FOR PRESENTATION ON MHC MOLECULESESTROGENS AND ATHEROSCLEROSISTHE HEME OXYGENASE SYSTEM:A Regulator of Second Messenger GasesESTROGENS AND ATHEROSCLEROSISSTRUCTURE-FUNCTION ASPECTS IN THE NITRIC OXIDE SYNTHASESENZYMATIC METHYLATION OF ARSENIC SPECIES AND OTHER NEW APPROACHES TO ARSENIC TOXICITYMOLECULAR DETERMINANTS OF DRUG BINDING AND ACTION ON L-TYPE CALCIUM CHANNELSSTRUCTURE-FUNCTION ASPECTS IN THE NITRIC OXIDE SYNTHASESENZYMATIC METHYLATION OF ARSENIC SPECIES AND OTHER NEW APPROACHES TO ARSENIC TOXICITYG PROTEIN βγ SUBUNITSSTRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF THE β3-ADRENERGIC RECEPTORPROTOZOAL AGENTS: What Are the Dangers for the Public Water Supply?MARKERS FOR PREDICTING THE DEVELOPMENT OF ACUTE RESPIRATORY DISTRESS SYNDROMEBEREAVEMENT AND LATE-LIFE DEPRESSION: Grief and Its Complications in the ElderlyNEUROPSYCHIATRIC CONSEQUENCES OF STROKEPHOTOPERIODIC TIME MEASUREMENT AND RELATED PHYSIOLOGICAL MECHANISMS IN INSECTS AND MITESECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION OF GALLING THRIPS AND THEIR ALLIESGENETIC DISSECTION OF SEXUAL BEHAVIOR IN DROSOPHILA MELANOGASTERBEHAVIOR AND ECOLOGICAL GENETICS OF WIND-BORNE MIGRATION BY INSECTSBIONOMICS OF THE FACE FLY, MUSCA AUTUMNALISBEHAVIOR AND ECOLOGICAL GENETICS OF WIND-BORNE MIGRATION BY INSECTSGENETIC DISSECTION OF SEXUAL BEHAVIOR IN DROSOPHILA MELANOGASTERBIOLOGY OF WOLBACHIABEHAVIOR AND ECOLOGICAL GENETICS OF WIND-BORNE MIGRATION BY INSECTSBEHAVIOR AND ECOLOGICAL GENETICS OF WIND-BORNE MIGRATION BY INSECTSSYSTEMATICS OF MOSQUITO DISEASE VECTORS (DIPTERA, CULICIDAE):Impact of Molecular Biology and Cladistic AnalysisBEHAVIOR AND ECOLOGICAL GENETICS OF WIND-BORNE MIGRATION BY INSECTSINSECTS AS TEACHING TOOLS IN PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATIONBEHAVIOR AND ECOLOGICAL GENETICS OF WIND-BORNE MIGRATION BY INSECTSDIPTERA AS PARASITOIDSPHYLOGENETIC ANALYSIS IN MOLECULAR EVOLUTIONARY GENETICSTHE SEARCH FOR THE QUARK-GLUON PLASMAPHYLOGENETIC ANALYSIS IN MOLECULAR EVOLUTIONARY GENETICSPRODUCTION OF HEAVY QUARKONIUM IN HIGH-ENERGY COLLIDERSPRODUCTION OF HEAVY QUARKONIUM IN HIGH-ENERGY COLLIDERSENERGY AND RESOURCE CONSTRAINTS ON INTENSIVE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIONOVERVIEW AND EVALUATION OF FUEL ETHANOL FROM CELLULOSIC BIOMASS: Technology, Economics, the Environment, and PolicyOVERVIEW AND EVALUATION OF FUEL ETHANOL FROM CELLULOSIC BIOMASS: Technology, Economics, the Environment, and PolicyPROGRESS COMMERCIALIZING SOLAR-ELECTRIC POWER SYSTEMSMICROBIAL DIVERSITY: Domains and KingdomsENERGY AND RESOURCE CONSTRAINTS ON INTENSIVE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIONPROGRESS COMMERCIALIZING SOLAR-ELECTRIC POWER SYSTEMSENVIRONMENTAL LIFE-CYCLE COMPARISONS OF RECYCLING, LANDFILLING, AND INCINERATION: A Review of Recent StudiesOVERVIEW AND EVALUATION OF FUEL ETHANOL FROM CELLULOSIC BIOMASS: Technology, Economics, the Environment, and PolicyDEMOGRAPHIC AND GENETIC MODELS IN CONSERVATION BIOLOGY: Applications and Perspectives for Tropical Rain Forest Tree SpeciesENERGY AND RESOURCE CONSTRAINTS ON INTENSIVE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIONDEMOGRAPHIC AND GENETIC MODELS IN CONSERVATION BIOLOGY: Applications and Perspectives for Tropical Rain Forest Tree SpeciesENVIRONMENTAL LIFE-CYCLE COMPARISONS OF RECYCLING, LANDFILLING, AND INCINERATION: A Review of Recent StudiesDEMOGRAPHIC AND GENETIC MODELS IN CONSERVATION BIOLOGY: Applications and Perspectives for Tropical Rain Forest Tree SpeciesSECURITY OF FISSILE MATERIALS IN RUSSIAMICROBIAL DIVERSITY: Domains and KingdomsOVERVIEW AND EVALUATION OF FUEL ETHANOL FROM CELLULOSIC BIOMASS: Technology, Economics, the Environment, and PolicyOVERVIEW AND EVALUATION OF FUEL ETHANOL FROM CELLULOSIC BIOMASS: Technology, Economics, the Environment, and PolicyOVERVIEW AND EVALUATION OF FUEL ETHANOL FROM CELLULOSIC BIOMASS: Technology, Economics, the Environment, and PolicyOVERVIEW AND EVALUATION OF FUEL ETHANOL FROM CELLULOSIC BIOMASS: Technology, Economics, the Environment, and PolicyMICROBIAL DIVERSITY: Domains and KingdomsSOME RECENT TRENDS IN GRAMMATICALIZATIONTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE ANTHROPOLOGY OF PHARMACEUTICALS: A Biographical ApproachTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE ANTHROPOLOGY OF PHARMACEUTICALS: A Biographical ApproachTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE ANTHROPOLOGY OF CITIES: Imagining and Theorizing the CityTHE ANTHROPOLOGY OF CITIES: Imagining and Theorizing the CityTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE ANTHROPOLOGY OF PHARMACEUTICALS: A Biographical ApproachTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE PARADOX OF CHILD LABOR AND ANTHROPOLOGYTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESSOME RECENT TRENDS IN GRAMMATICALIZATIONTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESHOLOCENE BIODIVERSITY: An Archaeological Perspective from the AmericasHOLOCENE BIODIVERSITY: An Archaeological Perspective from the AmericasTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIES“THE POPULAR” IN AMERICAN CULTURETHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESHOLOCENE BIODIVERSITY: An Archaeological Perspective from the AmericasTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE ANTHROPOLOGY OF PHARMACEUTICALS: A Biographical ApproachTHE CONSTRUCTION OF POVERTY AND HOMELESSNESS IN US CITIESTHE BIOCHEMISTRY AND GENETICS OF CAPSULAR POLYSACCHARIDE PRODUCTION IN BACTERIATHE SPECTROSCOPY OF SOLVATION IN HYDROGEN-BONDED AROMATIC CLUSTERSTHE SPECTROSCOPY OF SOLVATION IN HYDROGEN-BONDED AROMATIC CLUSTERSTHE SPECTROSCOPY OF SOLVATION IN HYDROGEN-BONDED AROMATIC CLUSTERSMECHANISMS OF ADHESION BY ORAL BACTERIAMECHANISMS OF ADHESION BY ORAL BACTERIAWHAT SIZE SHOULD A BACTERIUM BE? A Question of ScaleWHAT SIZE SHOULD A BACTERIUM BE? A Question of ScaleLIVE ATTENUATED VARICELLA VACCINESOME CHEMICAL AND STRUCTURAL EFFECTS ON THE PROPERTIES OF HIGH-Tc SUPERCONDUCTORSTHE BIOCHEMISTRY AND GENETICS OF CAPSULAR POLYSACCHARIDE PRODUCTION IN BACTERIATOWARDS A UNIFIED EVOLUTIONARY GENETICS OF MICROORGANISMSMECHANISMS OF ADHESION BY ORAL BACTERIABACTERIAL HEAVY METAL RESISTANCE: New SurprisesBACTERIAL HEAVY METAL RESISTANCE: New SurprisesLIVE ATTENUATED VARICELLA VACCINEBACTERIAL HEAVY METAL RESISTANCE: New SurprisesBACTERIAL AVIRULENCE GENESOZONE AND PLANT HEALTHOZONE AND PLANT HEALTHFUNGAL TRANSMISSION OF PLANT VIRUSESQTL MAPPING AND QUANTITATIVE DISEASE RESISTANCE IN PLANTSOZONE AND PLANT HEALTHOZONE AND PLANT HEALTHDWARF BUNT: Politics, Identification, and BiologyBACTERIAL AVIRULENCE GENESROLE AND REGULATION OF SUCROSE-PHOSPHATE SYNTHASE IN HIGHER PLANTSBIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY OF WAX PRODUCTION IN PLANTSTHE MOLECULAR BASIS OF DEHYDRATION TOLERANCE IN PLANTSROLE AND REGULATION OF SUCROSE-PHOSPHATE SYNTHASE IN HIGHER PLANTSTHE ORGANIZATION AND REGULATION OF PLANT GLYCOLYSISSOME NEW STRUCTURAL ASPECTS AND OLD CONTROVERSIES CONCERNING THE CYTOCHROME b6f COMPLEX OF OXYGENIC PHOTOSYNTHESISBIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY OF WAX PRODUCTION IN PLANTSMEMBRANE TRANSPORT CARRIERSBIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY OF WAX PRODUCTION IN PLANTSCARBOHYDRATE-MODULATED GENE EXPRESSION IN PLANTSTHE MOLECULAR-GENETICS OF NITROGEN ASSIMILATION INTO AMINO ACIDS IN HIGHER PLANTS14-3-3 PROTEINS AND SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONTHE MOLECULAR BASIS OF DEHYDRATION TOLERANCE IN PLANTSROLE AND REGULATION OF SUCROSE-PHOSPHATE SYNTHASE IN HIGHER PLANTSTHE ORGANIZATION AND REGULATION OF PLANT GLYCOLYSISTHE CHLOROPHYLL-CAROTENOID PROTEINS OF OXYGENIC PHOTOSYNTHESIS14-3-3 PROTEINS AND SIGNAL TRANSDUCTIONPHYSIOLOGY OF ION TRANSPORT ACROSS THE TONOPLAST OF HIGHER PLANTSTHE CHLOROPHYLL-CAROTENOID PROTEINS OF OXYGENIC PHOTOSYNTHESISBIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY OF WAX PRODUCTION IN PLANTSBIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY OF WAX PRODUCTION IN PLANTSBIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY OF WAX PRODUCTION IN PLANTSTHE FUNCTIONS AND REGULATION OF GLUTATHIONE S-TRANSFERASES IN PLANTSTHE CHLOROPHYLL-CAROTENOID PROTEINS OF OXYGENIC PHOTOSYNTHESISTHE QUALITY OF THE FOSSIL RECORD: Populations, Species, and CommunitiesImmunotoxins: An UpdateImmunotoxins: An UpdateMOLECULAR GENETICS OF HYPERTROPHIC CARDIOMYOPATHYMOLECULAR BIOLOGY OF DIABETES INSIPIDUSMOLECULAR BIOLOGY OF DIABETES INSIPIDUSREDUCED-SIZE HEPATIC ALLOGRAFTSMINIMALLY INVASIVE SURGERYXENOTRANSPLANTATIONCELLULAR AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY OF ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE AND ANIMAL MODELSMALE SEX DETERMINATION: Current Concepts of Male Sexual DifferentiationMOLECULAR EVENTS IN THE PATHOGENESIS OF HEPADNAVIRUS-ASSOCIATED HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMAMETABOLIC INTERACTIONS OF DIABETES AND PREGNANCYMOLECULAR EVENTS IN THE PATHOGENESIS OF HEPADNAVIRUS-ASSOCIATED HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMAMALE SEX DETERMINATION: Current Concepts of Male Sexual DifferentiationHYPERCALCEMIA OF MALIGNANCY: The Central Role of Parathyroid Hormone-Related ProteinHow Is Precursor Messenger RNA Spliced by the Spliceosome?RNA Splicing by the SpliceosomeHIV-1: Fifteen Proteins and an RNACovalent Trapping of Protein-DNA ComplexesApplications of Aptamers as SensorsSUBTRACTIVE CLONING: Past, Present, and FutureFrom Bioorganic Models to CellsReplisome-Mediated DNA ReplicationDNA Replicases from a Bacterial PerspectiveCELLULAR DNA REPLICASES: Components and Dynamics at the Replication ForkEngineered Ribosomes for Basic Science and Synthetic BiologyRIBOSOMES AND TRANSLATIONStructural Studies of RNase PIntegrating Diverse Data for Structure Determination of Macromolecular AssembliesEukaryotic Ribonuclease P: A Plurality of Ribonucleoprotein EnzymesRIBONUCLEASE P: Unity and Diversity in a tRNA Processing RibozymeRIBONUCLEASE P: Unity and Diversity in a tRNA Processing RibozymeRibozyme Structures and MechanismsRibozyme Structures and MechanismsMECHANISTIC ASPECTS OF ENZYMATIC CATALYSIS: Lessons from Comparison of RNA and Protein EnzymesMore AR articles citing this referenceFigure 1Modified nucleotides for transcription.
Figure Locations...as all of the four nucleoside α-thiotriphosphates are good substrates for DNA and RNA polymerases (Figure 1; 22)....
...synthesis of luciferase transcripts 2500 nt in length has been achieved (Figure 1; 29)....
Figure 2Modified oligonucleotide internucleotidic linkages.
Figure Locations...this exchange makes the phosphorus center chiral; therefore, two diastereomers of the phosphorothioate internucleotide linkage exist (Figure 2)....
...Oligodeoxynucleotides containing N3′-O5′phosphoramidate or N5′-O3′phosphoramidate linkages where either the 3′- or the 5′-oxygen is respectively exchanged with nitrogen possess interesting biophysical and biochemical properties (Figure 2)....
...where the bridging oxygen at position 3′- or 5′- is replaced by sulfur, have also generated considerable interest (Figure 2)....
...both of the nonbridging oxygens of the phosphodiester backbone are replaced by sulfur atoms (Figure 2; 133, 134, 135)....
...The methylphosphonate internucleotidic linkage is nonionic in contrast to the polyanionic natural phosphodiester backbone (Figure 2)....
Figure 2Modified oligonucleotide internucleotidic linkages.
Figure Locations...this exchange makes the phosphorus center chiral; therefore, two diastereomers of the phosphorothioate internucleotide linkage exist (Figure 2)....
...Oligodeoxynucleotides containing N3′-O5′phosphoramidate or N5′-O3′phosphoramidate linkages where either the 3′- or the 5′-oxygen is respectively exchanged with nitrogen possess interesting biophysical and biochemical properties (Figure 2)....
...where the bridging oxygen at position 3′- or 5′- is replaced by sulfur, have also generated considerable interest (Figure 2)....
...both of the nonbridging oxygens of the phosphodiester backbone are replaced by sulfur atoms (Figure 2; 133, 134, 135)....
...The methylphosphonate internucleotidic linkage is nonionic in contrast to the polyanionic natural phosphodiester backbone (Figure 2)....
Figure 3Base and sugar modifications.
Figure Locations...Representative structures of several modified bases are presented in Figure 3, ...
Figure 3Base and sugar modifications.
Figure Locations...Representative structures of several modified bases are presented in Figure 3, ...
Most Downloaded from this journalThe Hippo Pathway: Biology and PathophysiologyShenghong Ma, Zhipeng Meng, Rui Chen, Kun-Liang GuanVol. 88, 2019AbstractThe Hippo pathway was initially discovered in Drosophila melanogaster as a key regulator of tissue growth. It is an evolutionarily conserved signaling cascade regulating numerous biological processes, including cell growth and fate decision, organ size ...
Read MoreFigure 1: Core components of the Hippo pathway in mammalian cells. The Hippo pathway activity controls the dynamic localization of YAP/TAZ between nucleus and cytoplasm. (a) When the Hippo pathway is ...
Figure 2: Mechanical cues regulate YAP/TAZ activities through Rho GTPase and the Hippo pathway. Cell–cell contact, cell stretching, cell tension, extracellular matrix (ECM) stiffness, and changes in c...
Figure 3: The Hippo pathway integrates multiple signals to regulate the activity of YAP/TAZ. The LATS kinase activity is controlled by cell polarity and cell adhesion through KIBRA/NF2, tight junction...
Figure 4: YAP/TAZ and cancer hallmarks. The Hippo pathway effectors YAP/TAZ directly or indirectly control multiple cancer hallmarks, including proliferation, survival, evading growth suppressors, rep...
CRISPR/Cas9 in Genome Editing and BeyondHaifeng Wang, Marie La Russa, Lei S. QiVol. 85, 2016AbstractThe Cas9 protein (CRISPR-associated protein 9), derived from type II CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats) bacterial immune systems, is emerging as a powerful tool for engineering the genome in diverse organisms. As an RNA-...
Read MoreFigure 1: CRISPR-associated protein 9 (Cas9)-mediated sequence-specific genomic editing. (a) Comparison of programmable sequence-specific genome editing nucleases. (Top) Zinc-finger nucleases (ZFNs) a...
Figure 2: Nuclease-deactivated Cas9 (dCas9)-mediated sequence-specific gene regulation. (a) CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) strategies. Repression can occur with dCas9 alone in bacteria, which stericall...
Figure 3: Applications of CRISPR-associated protein 9 (Cas9) in gene editing, gene regulation, epigenome editing, and genomic imaging. (a) Cas9-mediated site-specific genome editing has a variety of a...
Mitochondrial Machineries for Protein Import and AssemblyNils Wiedemann and Nikolaus PfannerVol. 86, 2017AbstractMitochondria are essential organelles with numerous functions in cellular metabolism and homeostasis. Most of the >1,000 different mitochondrial proteins are synthesized as precursors in the cytosol and are imported into mitochondria by five transport ...
Read MoreFigure 1: Overview of the five major protein import pathways of mitochondria. Presequence-carrying preproteins are imported by the translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane (TOM) and the presequ...
Figure 2: The presequence pathway into the mitochondrial inner membrane (IM) and matrix. The translocase of the outer membrane (TOM) consists of three receptor proteins, the channel-forming protein To...
Figure 3: Role of the oxidase assembly (OXA) translocase in protein sorting. Proteins synthesized by mitochondrial ribosomes are exported into the inner membrane (IM) by the OXA translocase; the ribos...
Figure 4: Carrier pathway into the inner membrane. The precursors of the hydrophobic metabolite carriers are synthesized without a cleavable presequence. The precursors are bound to cytosolic chaperon...
Figure 5: Mitochondrial intermembrane space import and assembly (MIA) machinery. Many intermembrane space (IMS) proteins contain characteristic cysteine motifs. The precursors are kept in a reduced an...
Figure 6: Biogenesis of β-barrel proteins of the outer mitochondrial membrane. The precursors of β-barrel proteins are initially imported by the translocase of the outer membrane (TOM), bind to small ...
Figure 7: The dual role of mitochondrial distribution and morphology protein 10 (Mdm10) in protein assembly and organelle contact sites. Mdm10 associates with the sorting and assembly machinery (SAM) ...
Figure 8: Multiple import pathways for integral α-helical proteins of the mitochondrial outer membrane. The precursors of proteins with an N-terminal signal anchor sequence are typically inserted into...
Figure 9: The mitochondrial contact site and cristae organizing system (MICOS) interacts with protein translocases. MICOS consists of two core subunits, Mic10 and Mic60. Mic10 forms large oligomers th...
ExosomesD. Michiel Pegtel and Stephen J. GouldVol. 88, 2019AbstractExosomes are small, single-membrane, secreted organelles of ∼30 to ∼200 nm in diameter that have the same topology as the cell and are enriched in selected proteins, lipids, nucleic acids, and glycoconjugates. Exosomes contain an array of membrane-...
Read MoreFigure 1: Exosomes are heterogeneous in size, heterogeneous in composition, and enriched in membrane-associated, high-order oligomeric protein complexes. Although it is likely that no exosome contains...
Figure 2: Exosomes bud from endosome and plasma membranes. Exosome biogenesis occurs by three modes: () vesicle budding into discrete endosomes that mature into multivesicular bodies, which release ex...
THE GREEN FLUORESCENT PROTEINRoger Y. TsienVol. 67, 1998AbstractIn just three years, the green fluorescent protein (GFP) from the jellyfish Aequorea victoria has vaulted from obscurity to become one of the most widely studied and exploited proteins in biochemistry and cell biology. Its amazing ability to generate a ...
Read MoreFigure 1: GFP sequences. (Line 1) The wild-type (WT) gfp10 gene as originally cloned and sequenced by Prasher et al (10). (Line 2) A popular humanized version (EGFP, Clontech Laboratories, Palo Alto,...
Figure 2: Mechanism proposed by Cubitt et al (22) for the intramolecular biosynthesis of the GFP chromophore, with rate constants estimated for the Ser65 → Thr mutant by Reid & Flynn (23) and Heim et...
Figure 3: Stereoview of the three-dimensional structure of GFP (30), showing 11 β-strands forming a hollow cylinder through which is threaded a helix bearing the chromophore, shown in ball-and-stick ...
Figure 4: Amino acid side chains, main chain carbonyls and amides, and solvent waters in the immediate vicinity of the chromophore of S65T GFP (30). Side chains are labeled with the one-letter code f...
Figure 5: Fluorescence excitation and emission spectra (solid and dashed lines, respectively) for typical members of the six major classes of GFP mutants, together with the chromophore structures bel...
Figure 6: Location on the GFP crystal structure (30) of the most important sites that improve folding at 37°C. The amino acids shown in space-filling representation are the wild-type residues that ar...
