old id = 936
Worldcoin User Legal Center
1542
https://worldcoin.pactsafe.io/legal.html

Legal CenterErrorContractsUser AgreementEffective May 4, 2022Table of ContentsEffective May 4, 2022Effective May 4, 2022Effective May 4, 2022Effective May 4, 2022Effective May 4, 2022Effective May 4, 2022Effective May 4, 2022Effective September 28, 2021toMay 4, 2022Table of ContentsWORLDCOIN USER AGREEMENT v2.0Welcome to Worldcoin. This is a User Agreement between you (“you”, or “your”) and Tools for Humanity Corporation, a Delaware corporation ("Worldcoin", “we” or “us”). This User Agreement ("Agreement") governs your use of and access to the websites and applications we control, your Worldcoin user account (your “Account”), and all of the associated functionality, content, applications, and services we provide to you (collectively, the "Services").
Please read this Agreement carefully before using or accessing the Services. By accessing or using any of the Services we provide, you expressly agree to be bound by this Agreement and by ourPrivacy Statement.
IF YOU DO NOT UNDERSTAND THESE TERMS, PLEASE CONTACT US AT hello@worldcoin.org. WE’VE TRIED TO MAKE THESE TERMS EASY TO UNDERSTAND, AND WE ARE HAPPY TO HELP ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS YOU MAY HAVE.
To start, we want to draw your attention to two especially important parts of this Agreement:WHEN YOU AGREE TO THESE TERMS YOU ARE AGREEING (WITH LIMITED EXCEPTIONS) TO RESOLVE ANY DISPUTES BETWEEN YOU AND WORLDCOIN THROUGH BINDING, INDIVIDUAL ARBITRATION RATHER THAN IN COURT. PLEASE REVIEW CAREFULLY THE SECTION TITLED “DISPUTE RESOLUTION; ARBITRATION AND WAIVER OF CLASS ACTION” FOR DETAILS.
DISCLAIMER: NOTHING IN THE SERVICES CONSTITUTES AN OFFER TO SELL, OR THE SOLICITATION OF AN OFFER TO BUY ANY SECURITIES. THE SERVICES DO NOT CONSTITUTE INVESTMENT ADVICE. HOLDING, BUYING OR SELLING WORLDCOIN TOKENS (“WLD”) OR ANY OTHER DIGITAL CURRENCIES MAY NOT BE PERMITTED WHERE YOU LIVE, AND IT IS YOUR RESPONSIBILITY TO COMPLY WITH ALL LOCAL, STATE, NATIONAL, AND INTERNATIONAL LAWS, RULES, AND REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO YOU (“LAWS”).YOU SHOULD ALWAYS CAREFULLY CONSIDER WHETHER BUYING, SELLING, USING OR HOLDING DIGITAL CURRENCIES, INCLUDING WLD, IS SUITABLE FOR YOU IN LIGHT OF YOUR FINANCIAL CONDITION AND YOUR UNDERSTANDING OF DIGITAL CURRENCY TECHNOLOGY. THE VALUE OF WLD AND OTHER DIGITAL CURRENCIES MAY CHANGE QUICKLY AND MAY LOSE ALL OF THEIR VALUE. WE DO NOT GUARANTEE THAT WE WILL LAUNCH THE WORLDCOIN NETWORK, THAT THE WORLDCOIN NETWORK WILL OPERATE AS PLANNED, OR THAT WLD WILL HAVE VALUE.
Notices to You.
From time to time, we may send you emails, texts, or other automated notices (“Notices”) about the Services and your Account. You can choose the types of Notices, and the method we use to notify you, through your Account settings. You can change your preferences or disable Notices at any time. You understand that the Notices we provide you through your Account may be delayed or prevented due to circumstances beyond our control. We will do our best to provide Notices to you in a timely manner and with accurate information, but we cannot guarantee the delivery, timeliness, or accuracy of the content of any Notices. We are not liable to you or to anyone else due to any delays, failure to deliver, or misdirected delivery of any Notices; for any errors in the content of a Notice; or for any actions taken or not taken by you or any other person in reliance on a Notice. We will never include your Account password in any Notices we provide. However, Notices from us may include your username and other information about your Account. Depending upon the Notice method you select, information about your Account balance may be included, and may be visible to anyone who has access to that Notice method. If you choose to receive Notices from us via text message, your mobile service provider may charge you standard text messaging fees.
Your Privacy and Data. Our Privacy Statement (found at https://getworldcoin.com/privacy) contains a description of personally identifiable information (“PII”) and other data we collect from you during your use of the Services (collectively, your “Data”), and how we use it. Please read the Privacy Policy carefully, and do not use the Services if you do not want us to collect or use your Data in the manner described in the Privacy Policy. The Privacy Policy also describes your and our rights and obligations under applicable data protection and privacy Laws. In certain circumstances, we may be required by Law to give your Data to law enforcement. Before we do, we will carefully consider each request to determine whether the request complies with the Law, and we will not hesitate to challenge invalid, overbroad, or unlawful requests. We will do our best to preserve the integrity and security of your Data and to meet our obligations to you under the Law, but we cannot guarantee that others will never be able to obtain your Data from us or use it without permission. You are providing your Data to us at your own risk.
Eligibility.
By using the Services, you promise that you:If you do not meet all of these requirements, you are not allowed to access or use the Services.
Accessing the Services.
To access the Services, you need a computer or a mobile phone that is compatible with our software and that is capable of accessing the Internet. Our ability to provide the Services to you relies on the quality of your and our Internet and cellular connections, the reliability of your devices, and other circumstances beyond your and our control. We are not responsible for any losses you suffer if your or our access to the Internet is interrupted.
Your Worldcoin Account.
Your Account consists of a digital currency wallet and related functionality provided to you exclusively by Worldcoin. The Account is only capable of supporting WLD and any other digital currencies we choose to support from time to time (collectively, “Supported Currencies”). Under no circumstances should you attempt to store any digital currencies in your Account that we do not support. We will provide Notice to you of any additional Supported Currencies we support. You can log in to your Account to track the amounts you have earned from signing up to the Services, or from signing up other users to Worldcoin.
Your Account will be made available to you on a non-custodial basis enabling you to self-custody your WLD and any Supported Currencies. Ownership of any Supported Currencies in your Account will at all times remain with you, and you will bear all risk of loss related to your use of the Services to manage your Supported Currencies. We have no liability for any fluctuations in the value of your Supported Currencies. You control the Supported Currencies in your Account. Subject to any system outages, server downtime and any other interruptions to your use of the Services under this Agreement, you may withdraw your Supported Currencies by sending them to a different wallet address controlled by you or by a third party. We do not control the Worldcoin blockchain ledger or the ledger of any other Supported Currency, and we do not have the ability to reverse or modify your Account transactions.
Worldcoin Account Risks.
Loss of Account Credentials.
When you create an Account, our software generates a cryptographic private and public key pair that you may use to send and receive WLD and any other Supported Currencies. You may also choose to protect your Account with additional passphrases, identifiers, private keys, wallet addresses, two-factor authentication methods, and third-party password managers (collectively, your “Credentials”). You must store your Credentials, and any backups of your Credentials outside of your Account. We are unable to recover your Credentials or restore access to your Account if you lose access to or forget your Credentials, if we no longer offer some or all of the Services, or if we discontinue support for any Supported Currencies. You are solely responsible for managing and maintaining your Credentials and you agree that Worldcoin is not responsible for maintaining your Credentials or Data, for any unauthorized access to the Services, or for the loss of any Supported Currencies.
Fees. We do not charge any fees to use your Account; however, the software protocol that facilitates transactions in your Supported Currencies may impose a fee, and may award the fee to other users of the protocol who play a part in securing the validity and authenticity of transactions (“Network Fees”). We may estimate the Network Fee before you initiate a Transaction, but we do not control the amount of any Network Fee and we are not responsible if our estimate of your Network Fees is incorrect. Some Supported Currency software protocols may allow you to select the amount of the Network Fee. You are solely responsible for paying Network Fees and for the amounts you choose to pay, and we will not advance or fund any Network Fees on your behalf.
Forks. The software used to create WLD and Supported Currencies is open-source and free for anyone to copy and use. This means that anyone can create a modified version of a Supported Currency, otherwise known as a “Fork”. In the event of a Fork or any other disruption of a Supported Currency’s network, we may not be able to support any activity related to the Fork. Transactions may not be completed, completed partially, incorrectly completed, or substantially delayed when a Fork occurs. We are not responsible for any losses you incur caused in whole or in part by a Fork or other network disruption.
Other Risks. Supported Currencies are not legal tender and are not backed by any sovereign government. The Laws governing Supported Currencies are constantly changing and may affect your ability to use, transfer, or exchange Supported Currencies. The risk of loss of the value of a Supported Currency may be substantial and losses may occur over a short period of time.
Prohibited Uses.
We reserve the right at all times and in our sole discretion to monitor, review, cancel or suspend your access to or use of the Services, and to retain or disclose your Data to satisfy all sanctions programs, legal processes, governmental requests, or other applicable Laws. We reserve the right to cancel or suspend your access to the Services or close your Account without Notice if we determine, in our sole discretion, that your Account is associated with any of the activities listed below (“Prohibited Uses”). If we suspend or close your Account, you will no longer be able to view your Account balance or initiate Transactions through the Services. The items on the Prohibited Uses list are examples only and the list is not exhaustive; and we may add or remove types of prohibited activity in our sole discretion.
Prohibited Uses include:Illegal Activity: Activity that would violate, or assist in violation of, any sanctions programs administered by OFAC or any other Laws in the countries where Worldcoin conducts business; any activity involving proceeds of any illegal activity; or any publishing, distribution or dissemination of any illegal material or information.
Excessive Use or Hacking:Actions that impose an unreasonable or disproportionately large load on our infrastructure, or detrimentally interfere with, intercept, or expropriate any system, data, or information; transmit or upload any material to the Services that contains viruses, trojan horses, worms, or any other harmful or deleterious programs; or attempt to gain unauthorized access to the computer systems or networks connected to the Services.
Abuse of Others:Interfere with another person’s access to or use of the Services; defame, abuse, extort, harass, stalk, threaten or otherwise violate or infringe another person’s privacy, intellectual property, or any other legal rights; incite, threaten, facilitate, promote, or encourage hatred, racial intolerance, or violent acts against others; harvest, or scrape or collect another user’s email address, location, or any other data from the Services without permission.
Fraud and Other Unfair Business Practices: Activity that operates to defraud Worldcoin, Worldcoin users, or any other person; provide any false, inaccurate, or misleading information to Worldcoin; promise unreasonably high rewards or sell a service without added benefit to the buyer, or any other predatory and deceptive practices; or unlawful lotteries, raffles, bidding fee auctions, contests, sweepstakes, gambling, or any other game of chance.
Intellectual Property Infringement: Engage in transactions involving sales, distribution, or access to counterfeit music, movies, software, or other licensed materials without the appropriate authorization from the rights holder; use of Worldcoin intellectual property, name, or logo, including use of the Worldcoin trade or service marks without express consent from us or in a manner that otherwise harms Worldcoin or the Worldcoin brand; any action that implies an untrue endorsement by or affiliation with Worldcoin; or any other items that infringe or violate any copyright, trademark, right of publicity or privacy or any other proprietary right under the Law.
Reliance on Content; Changes to the Services.
The software, text, displays, images, video, audio and all other information and material we provide to you through the Services (“Content”) is solely for general information purposes, and we do not guarantee its accuracy, usefulness, or completeness. Any reliance you place on our Content is strictly at your own risk. We have no liability or responsibility for any actions you take or do not take because of the Content, or by anyone with whom you share the Content. Other users’ statements describing their use of our Services found on the Services or anywhere else should not be viewed as our endorsement of their statements if the statements are inconsistent with this Agreement or our Content. We may update the Content from time to time, but such Content may not be complete or up-to-date, and we are under no obligation to you to update the Content or any other part of the Services. We may modify or discontinue, temporarily or permanently, any part or all of the Content or Services without prior Notice to you. We will not be liable for any modification, suspension, or discontinuance of part or all of the Content or the Services.
Third-Party Content. We may provide links to educational materials, webinars, meet-ups, and promotions on Facebook, Instagram, Twitterand other social media platforms (“Third-Party Services”) that enable sharing and collaboration among Worldcoin users and other third parties. If you share any personal information, pictures, opinions, content, or any other Data on those services, you do so at your own risk, and your use of those services is subject to the terms of use and privacy policies of those services, and not ours. You should review the terms of services of each Third-Party Service to better understand your rights, and the manner in which those platforms use your Data. We are not responsible for any loss, theft, compromise, or misuse of your Data whatsoever in connection with any Third-Party Service (including negligence) except to the extent such liability cannot be limited under the Law. Your use of any information provided by a Third-Party Service (“Third-Party Content”) is at your own risk, and we make no promises to you that any Third-Party Content is accurate, complete, authentic, or appropriate for your personal circumstances. Third-Party Content includes information provided by other Worldcoin users not specifically endorsed by us.
Our Rights to Content Provided By You.
As a member of the Worldcoin community and as a Worldcoin user, we may allow you to post messages, data, images, programs or other content (“User Content”) on bulletin boards, blogs, social media accounts we own, and various other publicly available locations on the Services. These forums may be hosted by us or by one of our third-party service providers on our behalf. You are responsible for all User Content you submit, upload, post or store through the Services. You agree in posting User Content to follow certain rules. You are solely responsible for any lost or unrecoverable User Content. You must provide all required and appropriate warnings, information and disclosures regarding your User Content. We are not responsible for any User Content you submit through the Services. By submitting User Content to us, you represent that you have all necessary rights to the User Content and you are granting us a perpetual, worldwide, non-exclusive, royalty-free, sub-licensable and transferable license to use, reproduce, distribute, prepare derivative works from, modify, display, and perform all or any portion of the User Content in connection with Worldcoin marketing and promotions, and for any other legitimate business purpose related to the Services. We may redistribute part or all of and derivative works from your User Content in any media formats and through any media channels we choose. You also hereby grant each other Worldcoin user a non-exclusive license to access your User Content through the Services; and to use, reproduce, distribute, prepare derivative works of, display, and perform such User Content to enable the functionality of the Services. You agree not to use, nor permit any third party to use the Services to: (a) post or transmit any User Content that is libelous or defamatory, or that discloses private or personal matters concerning any person; (b) post or transmit any User Content that is indecent, obscene, pornographic, harassing, threatening, abusive, hateful, racially or ethnically offensive; that encourages conduct that would be considered a criminal offense, give rise to civil liability or violate any Law, or that is otherwise inappropriate; (c) post or transmit any User Content that would violate the intellectual property rights of others, including unauthorized copyrighted text, images or programs, trade secrets or other confidential proprietary information, or trademarks or service marks used in an infringing fashion; or (d) interfere with another Worldcoin user’s use of the Services. You represent to us that you are posting User Content to the Services voluntarily, and that posting User Content does not create an employer-employee relationship between you and us. You may not copy or use email addresses, mobile phone numbers, Account balances, usernames, or any other personal information about other Worldcoin users without their permission. Unsolicited emails, mailings, telephone calls, or other communications to other Worldcoin users through the Services or in any other channel are prohibited.
Additional Terms and Conditions.
Additional terms and conditions may apply to specific applications, Content, features, or portions of the Services, and all such additional terms and conditions we provide to you will form part of this Agreement. We intend for these additional terms to be as consistent with this Agreement to the greatest extent possible, but in the event of a direct conflict between this Agreement and the terms any specific application, Content or features, the terms and conditions for the specific application, Content or feature will take priority over this Agreement.
Use of the Services With Your Mobile Device.
The Services may be available to you through a compatible mobile device, and to access certain functionality you may be required to download, install, and maintain the Worldcoin mobile application (the “App”). To access the Services. You agree that you are solely responsible for meeting these requirements, paying any required fees, installing software updates, and complying with the terms of your agreement with your mobile device and telecommunications provider. WE MAKE NO EXPRESS, STATUTORY OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES OR REPRESENTATIONS OF ANY KIND AS TO: (A) THE AVAILABILITY OF TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES FROM YOUR PROVIDER AND ACCESS TO THE SERVICES AT ANY TIME OR FROM ANY LOCATION; (B) ANY LOSS, DAMAGE, OR OTHER SECURITY INTRUSION OF THE TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES; OR (C) ANY DISCLOSURE OF YOUR DATA TO THIRD PARTIES BY YOUR TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER, OR FAILURE TO TRANSMIT ANY DATA, COMMUNICATIONS OR SETTINGS CONNECTED WITH THE WORLDCOIN SERVICES.
Intellectual Property Rights. Our software, the Services, the Content, the Worldcoin Marks (as defined below) and the design, selection, and arrangement of the Content in the Services (the “Worldcoin IP”) are protected by copyright, trademark, patent, and other intellectual property rights and Laws of the United States and other applicable countries. You agree to abide by all applicable intellectual property rights and Laws, as well as any trademark or copyright notices or restrictions contained in the Agreement or the Services. We grant you a limited, revocable, non-exclusive, non-transferable license to the Worldcoin IP, subject to the terms of this Agreement, to access and use the Services, and related Content solely for purposes approved by us. Any other use of the Worldcoin IP is expressly prohibited and all other right, title, and interest in the Worldcoin IP will remain exclusively the property of Worldcoin. You are prohibited from modifying, copying, displaying, distributing, transmitting, publishing, selling, licensing, creating derivative works from, or using any portions of the Worldcoin IP for commercial or public purposes without our written permission or as expressly permitted by applicable Law. Unless we give you specific permission through the Services, you may only view, download and print the Content if:We reserve the right to revoke your permission to view, download, and print any Worldcoin IP at any time; and any rights we give you to the Worldcoin IP constitute a non-exclusive and revocable license and not a transfer of ownership to you. Worldcoin expressly reserves all rights in the Worldcoin IP to that we do not grant to you.
Trademarks.
The Tools for Humanity Corporation name, the Worldcoin name and design, and all logos, related product or service names, or slogans, related to the Services are trademarks or service marks of the Tools for Humanity Corporation (“Worldcoin Marks”) and you may not copy, imitate, or use the Worldcoin Marks, in whole or in part, unless we give you written permission. All other trademarks, names, or logos mentioned in connection with the Services are the property of their respective owners and you may not copy, imitate, or use them, in whole or in part, without the written permission of the applicable trademark owner. The inclusion of any marks of others in the Services does not constitute an approval, endorsement, or recommendation by us.
Complaints and DMCA Takedowns.
If you believe that your trademark or copyrighted work is being infringed by our Content or User Content on the Services or is otherwise being published in a way suggesting some endorsement of or affiliation with Worldcoin, please send an email to our Legal Team atlegal@worldcoin.orgwith the subject line “[Trademark/Copyright] Complaint,” whichever the case may be. For your complaint to be effective and in order for us to take action under the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (“DMCA”), you must follow all DMCA requirements by including the following information in your email:You should also be aware that under Section 512(f) of the DMCA, any person who knowingly sends meritless notices of infringement may be liable for damages, so please do not make any false claims. We may share any information or correspondence you provide us with third parties, including the person who uploaded the allegedly infringing material to the Service. When we receive abona fideinfringement notice, our policy is to: (a) immediately remove or disable access to the infringing content; (b) notify the person who uploaded the infringing material that we have removed or disabled access to the material; and (c) for repeat offenders, terminate the person’s access to the Services. If we receive a counter-notice from such person, we may send a copy of such counter-notice to you explaining that we may restore the removed material to the Services or cease disabling it in 10 business days. Unless you file an action seeking a court order against us or against the person who uploaded the content, we will restore access to the removed material in 10 to 14 business days or more after receipt of the counter-notice, at our discretion.
DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTIES.
YOUR USE OF THE SERVICES IS AT YOUR OWN RISK. THE SERVICES, THE CONTENT and ALL OTHER WORLDCOIN IP ARE PROVIDED ON AN “AS IS” AND “AS AVAILABLE” BASIS WITHOUT ANY REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTY, WHETHER EXPRESS, IMPLIED, OR STATUTORY. TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW, WORLDCOIN SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIMS ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF TITLE, MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, OR NON-INFRINGEMENT AS TO THE FEATURES, CONTENT, OR OTHER WORLDCOIN IP CONTAINED IN THE SERVICES. SOME JURISDICTIONS DO NOT ALLOW THE EXCLUSION OF IMPLIED WARRANTIES, SO THE ABOVE EXCLUSIONS MAY NOT APPLY TO YOU. WE DO NOT ENDORSE, GUARANTEE, OR ASSUME RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY ADVERTISEMENTS, OFFERS, OR STATEMENTS MADE BY THIRD PARTIES, INCLUDING OTHER WORLDCOIN USERS CONCERNING THE SERVICES.
WORLDCOIN DOES NOT MAKE ANY REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES THAT (A) ACCESS TO ALL OR PART OF THE SERVICES WILL BE CONTINUOUS, UNINTERRUPTED, TIMELY, SECURE, OR ERROR-FREE; (B) THAT THE SERVICES OR CONTENT ARE ACCURATE, COMPLETE, RELIABLE, OR CURRENT; (C) THAT THE SERVICES ARE FREE OF VIRUSES OR OTHER HARMFUL COMPONENTS; OR (D) THAT THE SERVICES OR THE CONTENT WILL MEET YOUR REQUIREMENTS, NEEDS, OR EXPECTATIONS.
ADDITIONALLY, WORLDCOIN DOES NOT MAKE ANY REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES WITH RESPECT TO THE LEGALITY OF THE SERVICES FOR ANY USE CASE, OR THAT THE SERVICES WILL MEET ANY REGULATORY OR COMPLIANCE NEEDS. YOU ARE SOLELY RESPONSIBLE FOR DETERMINING AND COMPLYING WITH ALL LEGAL AND REGULATORY RESTRICTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS THAT MAY GOVERN YOUR USE OF THE SERVICES. EXCEPT FOR THE EXPRESS STATEMENTS SET FORTH IN THIS AGREEMENT, YOU HEREBY ACKNOWLEDGE AND AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NOT RELIED UPON ANY OTHER STATEMENT OR UNDERSTANDING, WHETHER WRITTEN OR ORAL, WITH RESPECT TO YOUR ACCESS TO AND USE OF THE SERVICES.
WORLDCOIN IS NOT ACTING AND CANNOT ACT AS YOUR ADVISOR WITH RESPECT TO ANY FINANCIAL, LEGAL, INVESTMENT, OR TAX MATTERS. ANY CONTENT PROVIDED BY WORLDCOIN IS FOR GENERAL INFORMATION ONLY, AND YOU ARE SOLELY RESPONSIBLE FOR DETERMINING WHETHER OR NOT TO USE THE SERVICES. YOU ACKNOWLEDGE THAT TRADING, USING AND HOLDING DIGITAL CURRENCIES BY YOURSELF IS INHERENTLY RISKY, YOU MAY LOSE ALL OF THE FUNDS IN YOUR ACCOUNT. YOU ACKNOWLEDGE THAT THE SERVICE MAY BE SUBJECT TO EXPORT RESTRICTIONS AND ECONOMIC SANCTIONS IMPOSED BY U.S. LAW.
LIMITATION OF LIABILITY.
You agree that under no circumstances will we or any of our officers, directors, employees, contractors, agents, affiliates, or subsidiaries (the “Worldcoin Parties”) be liable to you for any indirect, punitive, incidental, special, consequential, or exemplary damages, including damages for loss of profits, goodwill, use, data, or other intangible property, whether such liability is asserted on the basis of tort or otherwise, and whether or not the Worldcoin Parties have been advised of the possibility of such damages arising out of or in connection with: (a) your use or inability to use the Services, your Supported Currencies, or the Worldcoin network; (b) inaccessibility or termination of the Services; (c) any hacking, tampering, unauthorized access to or alteration of any transaction or your Data; (d) any transaction or agreement entered into by you with any third party through the Services; (e) any activities or communications of third parties; (f) any loss of the value of any Supported Currency; (g) any Third-Party Content accessed on or through the Services; (h) errors, mistakes, or inaccuracies in our Content; (i) personal injury or property damage, of any nature whatsoever resulting from any access to or use of the Services; (j) viruses, trojan horses, or the like that may be transmitted to or through the Services; or (k) the defamatory, offensive, or illegal conduct of any third party. This limitation of liability will apply whether the damages arise from use or misuse of, or reliance on Worldcoin or the Services, notwithstanding any failure of essential purpose of any limited remedy and to the fullest extent permitted by Law. Under no circumstances will the Worldcoin Parties be liable to you for any direct claims, proceedings, liabilities, obligations, damages, losses, or costs in an amount exceeding $100.00. If you are dissatisfied with the Services, you agree that your sole and exclusive remedy will be for you to discontinue your use of the Services. This limitation of liability will apply to the fullest extent permitted byLaw. Some jurisdictions do not allow the exclusion of certain warranties or the limitation or exclusion of certain liabilities and damages. Accordingly, some of the disclaimers and limitations set forth in this Agreement may not apply to you.
IF YOU ARE A NEW JERSEY RESIDENT, the limitations of liability in this Agreement are intended to apply only to the extent permitted under New Jersey law.
Release and Indemnification.
You agree to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the Worldcoin Parties, from and against any claims, damages, costs, liabilities, reasonable attorneys’ fees and expenses brought against a Worldcoin Party by any third party arising out of or related to: (a) your use of the Services; (b) your violation of this Agreement; (c) your violation of any rights of another person; (d) your conduct in connection with the Services; or (e) your use of WLD, any Supported Currencies or the Worldcoin network. Some jurisdictions limit consumer indemnities, so some or all of the indemnity provisions in this paragraph may not apply to you. If you are obligated to indemnify any of the Worldcoin Parties, we reserve the right, in our sole discretion, to control any action or proceeding and to determine whether to settle and on what terms.
IF YOU ARE A CALIFORNIA RESIDENT, you waive the benefits and protections ofCalifornia Civil Code § 1542, which provides: “[a] general release does not extend to claims that the creditor or releasing party does not know or suspect to exist in his or her favor at the time of executing the release and that, if known by him or her, would have materially affected his or her settlement with the debtor or released party.”Governing Law.
You agree that the laws of the State of California, without regard to principles of conflict of laws, govern this Agreement and any dispute between you and us. You further agree that the Service will be deemed to be based solely in the State of California, and that although the Services may be available in other jurisdictions, its availability does not give rise to general or specific personal jurisdiction in any forum outside the State of California.
DISPUTE RESOLUTION, ARBITRATION AND WAIVER OF CLASS ACTION.
PLEASE READ THE FOLLOWING PARAGRAPHS CAREFULLY. THEY REQUIRE YOU TO SETTLE DISPUTES WITH WORLDCOIN THROUGH INDIVIDUAL ARBITRATION BEFORE A SOLE ARBITRATOR, AND NOT AS A MEMBER OF A CLASS ACTION. ARBITRATION PREVENTS YOU FROM SUING US IN COURT OR FROM HAVING A JURY TRIAL, EXCEPT THAT YOU BRING A DISPUTE AGAINST US IN SMALL CLAIMS COURT IF YOU QUALIFY.
We will use our best efforts to resolve any potential disputes through informal, good faith negotiations. If a potential dispute arises, you must contact us by sending an email tolegal@worldcoin.orgso that we can attempt to resolve it without resorting to formal dispute resolution. If we aren’t able to reach an informal resolution within 60 days after your email, and you elect to bring a federal or state statutory claim; common law claim; claim based in contract, tort, fraud, misrepresentation or any other legal theory; or any other formal proceeding arising out of or relating to this Agreement, the Content or the Services (each, a “Dispute”), then you agree to resolve the Dispute through binding arbitration, on an individual basis according to the following terms (collectively, the “Arbitration Agreement”):30-Day Right to Opt Out. You have the right to opt out and not be bound by this Arbitration Agreement by sending an email from the address you used to create your Account with the Subject Line: “ARBITRATION AND CLASS ACTION WAIVER OPT-OUT”. You must send your email within 30 days of agreeing to the terms of this Agreement, otherwise you will be bound to arbitrate Disputes in accordance with the terms of this Arbitration Agreement. If you opt out of this Arbitration Agreement, Worldcoin will also not be bound by its terms.
Changes to this Arbitration Agreement. We will provide you 30 days’ notice of any changes to the section of this Agreement titled “Dispute Resolution, Arbitration and Waiver of Class Action”by Notice to you, and the changes will become effective 30 days after you receive Notice from us. Changes to the section titled “Dispute Resolution, Arbitration and Waiver of Class Action”will otherwise apply prospectively only to Disputes that arise after the 30thday. If a court or arbitrator decides that the changes to the section titledDispute Resolution, Arbitration and Waiver of Class Actionare not enforceable or valid, then the changes will be severed from this Agreement and the court or arbitrator will apply the terms of the first Arbitration Agreement in effect after you began using the Services. You may exercise your right to opt out of the new Arbitration Agreement terms by following the procedures set forth in the section above titled “30-Day Right to Opt Out”.
This Arbitration Agreement will survive the termination of this Agreement, and your use of the Account or the Services.
Notwithstanding anything in this Arbitration Agreement to the contrary, either party may bring a lawsuit solely for injunctive relief to stop unauthorized use or abuse of the Services, or infringement of intellectual property rights (for example, trademark, trade secret, copyright or patent rights) without first engaging in arbitration or the informal dispute resolution process described above.
Assignability; No Third-Party Beneficiaries.
No provision of this Agreement is intended, nor will be interpreted to provide or create any third-party beneficiary rights or any other rights of any kind in any other person not a party to this Agreement unless specifically provided otherwise in this Agreement; and except as so provided, all provisions of this Agreement will be personal solely between you and Worldcoin. Worldcoin may assign its rights and duties under this Agreement without restriction to any Worldcoin affiliates or subsidiaries, to any successor in interest of any business or entity associated with the Services, or to any other party at any time without Notice to you. You may not assign any rights or licenses granted under this Agreement to another person or entity. Any attempted transfer or assignment in violation of this Agreement by you will be null and void.
No Waiver.
No waiver by Worldcoin, whether by conduct or otherwise of any term, provision, or condition set forth in this Agreement will be deemed a further or continuing waiver of such term, provision, or condition; or a waiver of any other term, provision, or condition. Any failure or delay by Worldcoin to assert a right or provision under this Agreement will not constitute a waiver of such right or provision.
Severability.
If any provision of this Agreement is determined to be invalid or unenforceable under any Law, such provision will be modified and interpreted to accomplish the intent of the provision to the greatest extent possible under applicable Law, and the validity or enforceability of any other provision of this Agreement will not be affected.
Entire Agreement. This Agreement and the Privacy Policy constitute the complete and exclusive statement of the agreement between you and Worldcoin with respect to the Services and your Account and supersedes all prior and contemporaneous understandings, agreements, representations and warranties, both written and oral, concerning the Services. Section headings in this Agreement are for convenience only and will not govern the meaning or interpretation of any provision of this Agreement.
Relationship of the Parties.
Nothing in this Agreement will be deemed or is intended to be deemed, nor will it cause you and Worldcoin to be treated as partners, joint-venturers, or otherwise as joint associates for profit, and neither you or Worldcoin will be treated as the agent of the other. This includes the fact that nothing in this Agreement establishes or is intended to establish any employment relationship between you and Worldcoin.
No Professional Advice or Fiduciary Duties.
All Content provided by us is for informational purposes only and should not be construed as professional advice. You should not take, or refrain from taking, any action based on any information contained in the Services. Before you make any financial, legal, or other decisions involving the Services or any Supported Currencies, you should seek independent professional advice from an individual who is licensed and qualified in the area for which such advice would be appropriate. This Agreement is not intended to, and does not, create or impose any fiduciary duties on us. To the fullest extent permitted by Law, you acknowledge and agree that we owe no fiduciary duties or liabilities to you or any other party, and that to the extent any such duties or liabilities may exist at law or in equity, those duties and liabilities are hereby irrevocably disclaimed, waived, and eliminated. You further agree that the only duties and obligations that we owe you are those set out expressly in this Agreement.
Taxes.
It is your responsibility to determine what, if any taxes apply due to your use of the Services or ownership of WLD or other Supported Currencies, and it is your responsibility to report and remit the correct taxes to the appropriate tax authority. Worldcoin is not responsible for determining whether taxes apply to your Supported Currency transactions or for collecting, reporting, withholding or remitting any taxes arising from any such transactions.
Contact Worldcoin.
If you have feedback, or general questions, contact us atinfo@worldcoin.org.
Amendments.
We may amend or modify this Agreement by providing Notice to you, and the revised Agreement will be effective at such time. If you do not agree with any such modification, your sole and exclusive remedy is to terminate your use of the Services and close your Account. You agree that we will not be liable to you or any third party for any modification or termination of the Services, or suspension or termination of your access to the Services, except to the extent otherwise expressly set forth in this Agreement.
Change of Control.
In the event that Worldcoin is acquired by or merged with a third-party entity, we reserve the right, in any of these circumstances, to transfer or assign the Data we have collected from you as part of such merger, acquisition, sale, or other change of control.
Survival.
All provisions of this Agreement pertaining to suspension or termination, Account cancellation, debts owed to Worldcoin, general use of the Services, Disputes with Worldcoin, and provisions of this Agreement which by their nature extend beyond the expiration or termination of this Agreement, , will survive the termination or expiration of this Agreement.
Force Majeure.
We will not be liable for delays, failure in performance or interruption of service that result directly or indirectly from significant market volatility in Supported Currencies, any act of God, acts of civil or military authorities, acts of terrorists, civil disturbances, war, strike, health emergency, labor dispute, fire, interruption in telecommunications or Internet services or network provider services, failure of equipment or software. or any cause or condition beyond our reasonable control (each, a “Force Majeure Event”).The occurrence of a Force Majeure Event will not affect the validity and enforceability of any of the remaining provisions of this Agreement.
Data Consent FormEffective May 4, 2022Table of ContentsEffective May 4, 2022Effective May 4, 2022Effective May 4, 2022Effective May 4, 2022Effective May 4, 2022Effective May 4, 2022Effective May 4, 2022Effective September 28, 2021toMay 4, 2022Table of ContentsWORLDCOINDATA CONSENT FORM v2.2Consent to Process Personal and Sensitive Data for Transfer to Another CountryBy agreeing to this Data Consent Form, you allow us to collect images of your iris and other Sensitive Data through the Orb and transfer the Sensitive Data to our facilities in Germany and other countries for the purposes such as training of our neural network for the recognition of human irises, as further described below. You also agree that the neural network is not error-free.
IMPORTANT: PROVIDING YOUR CONSENT AND PARTICIPATING IN THE WORLDCOIN PROJECT DESCRIBED BELOW IS COMPLETELY VOLUNTARY, AND YOU ARE UNDER NO OBLIGATION TO GIVE US YOUR CONSENT. HOWEVER, IF YOU DO NOT GIVE US YOUR CONSENT, YOUR ABILITY TO PARTICIPATE IN THE WORLDCOIN PROJECT AT THIS TIME MAY BE LIMITED. YOU MAY CHANGE YOUR MIND AND WITHDRAW YOUR CONSENT AT ANY TIME.
Tools for Humanity Corporation, a Delaware corporation located at 548 Market St, PMB #49951, San Francisco, CA 94104 in the United States and its wholly-owned subsidiary Tools For Humanity GmbH, located at Allee am Röthelheimpark 41, 91052 Erlangen, Germany(collectively, “Worldcoin”, “we”, “our”, or “us”) would like your consent to: (a) collect and process certain personal information from you (your “Data”), and (b) to transfer your Data from the country where you live to another country, solely for the purposes described in this consent form (“Consent Form”).
Your consent and our use of your Data is also subject to the terms of our Privacy Statement, available at getworldcoin.com/Privacy. The Privacy Statement generally describes the Data we collect, how we process your Data, what we use the Data for, how we store your Data, with whom we share your Data, and your rights under applicable privacy laws (“Privacy Laws”). This Consent Form concerns specific types of Data that by their nature are considered more sensitive than other Data (“Sensitive Data”; described in more details in Section 4 below). To comply with certain Privacy Laws, we are required to obtain your formal written consent before we collect and process any Sensitive Data from you, or transfer your Sensitive Data from one country to another country.
We are developing a software algorithm (the “Algorithm”) that can distinguish minute differences among human irises using a special device called an Orb. The Orb is capable of taking extremely detailed images of a participant’s face and eyes, including the iris, sclera, eyelashes and other parts of the eye. We would like to train the Algorithm to get better at recognizing the differences between participants’ irises, and therefore we need to collect and process as many images of irises as we can. We need to differentiate among participants’ irises because we are trying to develop a global software protocol and cryptocurrency using blockchain technology, called Worldcoin, that will permit every person on the planet to receive a fair share of Worldcoin tokens. The Algorithm is an automated decision-making process and we plan to use the Algorithm and the Orbs to prevent anyone from claiming more than their fair share of Worldcoin. The Algorithm is necessary to ensure that people aren’t claiming more than their fair share. We use images of the iris because the iris is even more provably unique than the human face or fingerprints.
If you give us your consent to collect your Sensitive Data by photographing your iris, your face, and your body using the Orb, we will transfer your Sensitive Data to our teams in in the United States, India, Japan, the United Kingdom, and Germany because: (a) our research and development facilities are located in those countries, and (b) we are unable to operate the software we use to process your Sensitive Data where you live. As a result, we may transfer to, and store your Sensitive Data in part in the United States or elsewhere, where Privacy Laws may be less protective of your Data than the Privacy Laws in the European Union (the General Data Protection Regulation or “GDPR”), and which such Privacy Laws may also be less protective than the Privacy Laws where you live. Furthermore, like all software, the Algorithm is not error free and may make an incorrect decision, such as determining that you have already claimed your Worldcoins when you haven’t. By agreeing to this Data Consent Form, you also agree that your only recourse is to stop the sign-up process if you disagree with the Algorithm’s decision.
Below is a list of possible risks that may arise if we transfer your Sensitive Data to the United States, the European Union, or another country (Please note that this list contains examples, but may not include all possible risks to you):Naturally, we will do everything possible to ensure that these risks do not materialize, and you should know that we voluntarily comply with the GDPR as a matter of policy. We fully support your right to understand your rights and risks under this Consent Form and the GDPR and you should feel free to ask us any questions you may have before you sign. If you sign this Consent Form, we will becontractuallyrequired to use your Sensitive Data exclusively for the Worldcoin Project in the manner described above, but the terms of this contract may not be sufficient to fully protect your rights.
The European Union Commission responsible for making determinations of the adequacy of the Privacy Laws of other jurisdictions in comparison to the GDPR has not yet positively established that the country-specific level of personal data protection in the United States, where part of your Data is processed, provides the same level of protection as the Privacy Laws in the European Union.
In addition, we have not adopted a board-approved data privacy and security policy describing the means and the methods by which we plan to protect your Data to meet the standards prevalent in the GDPR, nor have we submitted our Privacy Statement or any of our internal policies and procedures to any regulatory authority to determine whether they meet GDPR standards of protection. Therefore, there is a possibility that our policies and procedures will not be sufficient to meet GDPR requirements.
In order to carry out the objectives of the Worldcoin Project, we are asking for your consent to process (collect, store and use) your Sensitive Data and to transfer it to our teams in the United States, India, Japan, the United Kingdom, and Germany, including employees and contractors of Worldcoin.
We will collect the following Sensitive Data:Please note that the image of your iris may fall under “Special Categories of Personal Data” under the GDPR and may be considered “Sensitive Data” in certain other jurisdictions, and is therefore afforded special protections under the Law.
First, the Algorithm analyzes the raw images of your iris to create a digital file containing a purely numeric representation of the unique characteristics of your iris. Second, the Algorithm uses cryptographic hashing techniques to encrypt the file into a secure code (the “iris code”). Once generated by the Algorithm, your iris code cannot be reversed to expose the precise characteristics of your iris to any computer system or to anyone else. Third, the Algorithm compares your iris code to the iris codes in the Worldcoin database to determine whether we have already scanned your iris. If your iris code matches another iris code in the Worldcoin database, then we can determine that you have already scanned your iris using the Orb. Absent you re-presenting yourself to our Orb, however, we are not able to use the Worldcoin database to determine whether you have already scanned your irs.
We process the above-mentioned Sensitive Data exclusively for the following purposes:You acknowledge that you can revoke your Consent at any time to the responsible entity by contacting us at:The Worldcoin Request Portal,privacy@worldcoin.org,Tools For Humanity Corporation, 548 Market Street, PMB 49951, San Francisco, CA 94104 USA, orTools for Humanity GmbH, Allee am Röthelheimpark 41, 91052 Erlangen, GermanyRevocation by you of your consent shall not affect our legal basis for the processing and transport of your Sensitive Data carried out by us on the basis of the consent given by you to us prior to such revocation. Thus, our legal basis for processing your Sensitive Data isArt. 6 para. 1 sent. 1 lit. a, Art. 7read in conjunction withArt. 9 para. 2 lit. a, Art. 49 para. 1 sent. 1 lit. aof the GDPR.
By taking the action of checking the box below, I hereby explicitly consent to the processing and transmission of my Sensitive Data to the Worldcoin teams in the United States, India, Japan, the United Kingdom, and Germany.
Privacy StatementEffective May 4, 2022Table of ContentsEffective May 4, 2022Effective May 4, 2022Effective May 4, 2022Effective May 4, 2022Effective May 4, 2022Effective May 4, 2022Effective May 4, 2022Effective December 7, 2021toMay 4, 2022Table of ContentsLast updated: 6 December 2021Thank you for choosing to be part of the Worldcoin Community!At Worldcoin (“Worldcoin,” “us,” or “we”), we recognize that your privacy is important. This Privacy Statement applies to all information we collect from you (your “Data”) through your use of and access to our websites and applications we control, your Worldcoin user account (your “Account”), the Worldcoin protocol (the “Protocol”) and all of the associated functionality, content, applications, and services we provide to you (collectively, the "Services").
We are committed to protecting your Data and your right to privacy, and we expressly designed the Services with your privacy in mind. By accessing and using the Services, you signify acceptance of the terms of this Privacy Statement. Where we require your consent to process your Data, we will ask for your consent to the collection, use, and disclosure of your Data as described further below. If you do not agree to the terms of our Privacy Statement, you may not access or use our Services. All capitalized terms not defined in this Privacy Statement have the meaning set forth in the Worldcoin User Agreement.
If you have any questions or concerns about how we use your Data, you may submit your request through ourRequest Portalor write to us at Tools For Humanity Corporation, 548 Market Street, PMB 49951, San Francisco, CA 94104 USA.
Data You Provide To UsTo establish an Account or gain access to our Services, we will ask you to provide us with some information about you. Please note that we may not be able to serve you as effectively or offer you our Services if you choose not to share certain information with us. We may collect the following types of Data from you:We may also use the information above to provide transaction features within our Services, including finding other users and facilitating transactions with other users, including through imported contacts.
If you elect to import your device’s address book contacts to find out which of your contacts uses our Services or invite them to join you in using our Services, we will periodically sync your contacts’ information, including phone number and email, to our servers. You are responsible for ensuring your collection and sharing with us of your contacts’ information is compliant with applicable laws. This may require you to obtain your contacts’ permission. We may also get information about you from other users importing or entering their contacts. We use and may store this contact information to help you and your contacts connect through our Services. You can change your mind and turn off our access to your contacts at any time in your device settings.
WITH YOUR EXPLICIT WRITTEN CONSENT, WE MAY ALSO COLLECT IMAGES OF YOUR IRIS AND YOUR FACE. SOME JURISDICTIONS CONSIDER THESE IMAGES AS A TYPE OF BIOMETRIC DATA SUBJECT TO SPECIAL PROTECTION UNDER THE LAW. WE COLLECT THE BIOMETRIC DATA FOR THE PURPOSE OF UNIQUELY IDENTIFYING A NATURAL PERSON IN ORDER TO PROVIDE OUR SERVICES TO YOU. IN ORDER FOR WORLDCOIN TO USE YOUR BIOMETRIC DATA, YOU WILL NEED TO FIRST SIGN A CONSENT FORM AUTHORIZING WORLDCOIN TO USE THIS DATA.
Data We Collect From Third-Party SourcesFrom time to time, we may obtain information about you from the following third-party sources:Data We Collect About You AutomaticallyTo the extent permitted under applicable Law, we may collect certain types of Data automatically, such as whenever you interact with or use our Services. This information helps us address customer support issues, improve the performance of the Services, provide you with a streamlined and personalized experience, and to help you secure your Account credentials. Information collected automatically includes:Similarly, the Worldcoin mobile application gathers information for troubleshooting and improvement. We use third party services, such as Segment.io, to view aggregated information about end user usage and interactions. Where possible, we take steps to minimize or mask the information sent to third parties (such as encoding the data).
Anonymized and Aggregated DataAnonymization is a data processing technique that modifies personal data so that it cannot be associated with a specific individual. Except as described in this section, none of the other provisions of this Privacy Statement applies to anonymized or aggregated customer data (i.e. information about individuals that we combine together so that it no longer identifies or references an individual).
We may use anonymized or aggregate data for any business purpose, including to better understand user needs and behaviors, improve our Services, conduct business intelligence and marketing, detect security threats, and train our algorithms and models. We or our third-party advertising partners may also collect certain anonymous or aggregate information. For example, we may use your IP address to diagnose problems with our servers, software, and to gather demographic information. Our third-party advertising partners may also provide us with aggregate, but not individual, reports that will tell us how many ads were presented and clicked upon on our Services.
Types of data we may anonymize include, transaction data, click-stream data, performance metrics, fraud indicators, and hashed iris scans.
2. How We Use Your DataWe will use certain forms of Data to enhance the operation of our websites, improve our internal marketing and promotional efforts, statistically analyze Website use, to improve the Services, for research and development purposes, and to train our algorithms and models. We use the blockchain network address associated with your account to send you Worldcoins (“WLD”) or other Supported Currencies. We use your Data to deliver information to you and to send you Notices. We use your IP address to block individuals from prohibited states or countries from accessing the Services and to comply with applicable Law. Finally, we may use your Data to resolve disputes, troubleshoot technical problems and enforce our agreements with you, including the Worldcoin User Agreement and this Privacy Statement.
3. Special Categories of DataWhen you are ready to claim your share of WLD, you will be asked to provide biometric data in the form of taking images of your irises and your face using the Orb. The Orb software will capture these images and will create a hashed unique identifier based on your iris image (“IrisHash”). Our primary purpose in collecting your biometric data is to distribute WLD equitably by ensuring that every living individual in the world will only have one opportunity to claim WLD. In order to prevent individuals from claiming their WLD multiple times, we need to be able to determine whether you have previously claimed WLD from the Worldcoin Protocol without jeopardizing your privacy or invading the privacy of others. With your written consent, we collect images of your irises, make an IrisHash based on the iris image, and compare the IrisHash to the other IrisHashes in the Worldcoin database to determine whether you have already claimed your WLD, and upon determination that the IrisHash does not exist in the database, store the IrisHash in the database. Before our algorithms are fully trained and with your consent, we also transmit the biometric data to our server for research and development purposes and for fraud prevention purposes.
When you provide us with biometric data, you agree that you have voluntarily provided such Data, and you consent for us to use that information for the purposes for which it was collected.
We only disclose Data to our team members who require access to the Data in order to perform their tasks and duties and our service providers whose services we rely on in order to process the Data and provide our Services to you. We ensure that anyone who accesses the Data has a legitimate purpose for accessing it.
We do not sell, license, lease or otherwise disclose your Data to any third party for any reason other than the purposes described below:We do not sell any biometric data.
Transaction information related to your use of your Account and the Services may be recorded on a public blockchain. Public blockchains are distributed ledgers, intended to immutably record transactions across wide networks of computer systems. Many blockchains are open to forensic analysis, which can lead to de-anonymization and the unintentional revelation of private financial information, especially when blockchain data is combined with other Data. It may therefore be possible for others to identify Data from (and including) wallet addresses (including your Worldcoin wallet address) and other data available on the blockchain that supports the Worldcoin Protocol, without the involvement of Worldcoin, as the blockchain is by nature a transparent and public ledger.
We use cookies to help our Services work better. In addition to cookies, we may use other similar technologies, like web beacons to track users of our Services. Web beacons, or "clear gifs," are tiny graphics with a unique identifier, similar in function to cookies. They are used to track the online movements of web users.
In contrast to cookies, which are stored on a user's computer hard drive or device, clear gifs are embedded invisibly on web pages and are about the size of the period at the end of this sentence. We and our third-party service provider employ web beacons for the reasons stated below, but primarily to help us better manage content on our Services by informing us which content is effective.
We may also use so-called "Flash Cookies" (also known as "Local Shared Objects or "LSOs") to collect and store information about your use of our services, fraud prevention and for other site operations.
These tools allow us to:We use cookies and trackers to assign you a unique identifier so we can record:You can block cookies at any time using your web browser settings, but doing so may limit your browsing experience and your ability to use certain features of the Services. We do not currently respond to “Do Not Track” or DNT browser signals or any other mechanism that automatically communicates your choice not to be tracked online.
We use the following types of cookies:Strictly Necessary CookiesThese cookies are necessary for the Services to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in, or filling in forms. These also include cookies we may rely on for fraud prevention. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some of the Services may not work.
Performance/Analytics CookiesThese cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our Services. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the Services. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have used our Services, and will not be able to monitor its performance.
Functionality CookiesThese cookies allow us to remember the choices you make and to tailor our Services so we can provide relevant content to you. For example, a functionality cookie can remember your preferences (e.g., country or language selection), or your username.
Targeting/Advertising CookiesWorldCoin uses third-party service providers to display advertising on our Services and serve advertising on other third-party sites that may be relevant to you or your interests. These cookies are also used to help measure the effectiveness of the advertising campaign. They remember that you have visited a website and this information may be shared with other organizations, such as advertisers. This means that after you have been to our websites, you may see some advertisements about our Services elsewhere on the Internet. The information collected through this process by the third-party service providers does not enable us or them to identify your name, contact details or other personal information that directly identifies you unless you choose to provide these. Such advertising will only be delivered where permitted by applicable law. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less advertising tailored to your inferred interests on our Sites and will not receive targeted WorldCoin advertisements on third-party websites.
Worldcoin also uses Google Analytics. The following link explains how Google uses Data when you use its partners’ websites and applications: https://www.google.com/policies/privacy/partners/. Your use of the Services is evidence of your consent to Worldcoin storing and accessing cookies and other Data on your computer or mobile device= and Worldcoin’s use of Google Analytics in connection with such activities. Please read the information at the link provided so you understand what you are consenting to.
Worldcoin strives to ensure that our systems are secure and that they meet industry standards. We seek to protect Data that is provided to Worldcoin by third parties and by you by implementing physical and electronic safeguards. Worldcoin endeavors to engage third-party service providers that have security and confidentiality policies, if such third-party service providers have access to our customer’s Data.
Despite our efforts to protect the security of your information, no security system is completely effective and we cannot guarantee that our systems will be secure from unauthorized access.
We will retain your Data as long as you continue to use the Services, or for as long as is necessary to fulfill the purposes outlined in this Privacy Statement. Even after you or we delete your Account, we can retain copies of your Data for a period of time that is consistent with applicable Law, applicable statutes of limitation or as we believe is reasonably necessary to comply with applicable Law, legal processes or governmental request, to collect fees owed, to resolve Disputes, to address problems with our Services, to assist with investigations, to enforce the Worldcoin User Agreement or other applicable agreements or policies, or to take any other actions consistent with applicable Law.
WE WILL PERMANENTLY DELETE YOUR BIOMETRIC DATA IMMEDIATELY AFTER WE CONCLUDE THE PURPOSE FOR WHICH IT WAS COLLECTED. WE WILL RETAIN HASHED BIOMETRIC DATA FOR AS LONG AS IS NECESSARY TO FULFILL THE PURPOSES OUTLINED IN THIS PRIVACY STATEMENT.
Please note that blockchains are decentralized or third-party networks that are not controlled or operated by Worldcoin. Due to the public and immutable nature of blockchain technology, we cannot amend, erase, or control the disclosure of such Data to or from such networks.
Our legal basis for collecting and using the Data described above will depend on the Data concerned and the specific context in which we collect it.
In some cases, we may also have a legal obligation to collect Data from you or we may otherwise need the Data to protect your vital interests or those of another person. If we ask you to provide Data to comply with a legal requirement or to perform a contract with you, we will make this clear at the relevant time and advise you whether the provision of your Data is mandatory or not (as well as of the possible consequences if you do not provide your Data).
Individuals under the age of 16 are not allowed to use the Services, and we do not knowingly collect Data from Children in violation of the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act. If you believe that your child under 13 has gained access to the Services without your permission, you may request the deletion of their Data by contacting us through ourRequest Portal.
If we learn that we have collected Data about a child under age 13, we will delete that Data as quickly as possible. We have taken commercially reasonable steps to restrict use of the Services to those who are at least 16 years old. We do not market products or services for purchase by Children.
To facilitate our global operations, Worldcoin may transfer, store, and process your Data within our family of companies, partners, and service providers based throughout the world. We contractually obligate recipients of your Data to agree to at least the same level of privacy safeguards as required under applicable data protection laws. By communicating electronically with Worldcoin, you acknowledge and agree to your Data being processed in this way.
We may transfer Data to countries other than the country in which the Data was originally collected. These countries may not have the same data protection laws as the country in which you initially provided the Data. When we transfer your Data to other countries, we take measures to comply with applicable data protection laws related to such transfer. To the extent that we transfer your Data outside of the EEA and United Kingdom, we will ensure that the transfer is lawful and that Data Processors in third countries are obliged to comply with the GDPR and the UK Data Protection Act 2018. If transfers of Data are processed in the U.S., we may in some cases rely on applicable standard contractual clauses.
Worldcoin reserves the right to make changes to this Privacy Statement. You should review our Privacy Statement frequently. If we make material changes to our Privacy Statement, our revised Privacy Statement will be posted at getworldcoin.com/privacy, and it will either be noted in your Account or on our Website that material changes have been made, or we will notify you by email. The date of the most recent update to our Privacy Statement will be set forth in the header of the Privacy Statement.
If you have questions or concerns regarding this Privacy Statement, wish to exercise your rights, or to contact our Data Privacy Officer, please submit your request through ourRequest Portalor write to us at Tools For Humanity Corporation, 548 Market Street, PMB 49951, San Francisco, CA 94104 USA. We respond to all requests we receive from individuals wishing to exercise their data protection rights in accordance with applicable data protection laws.
Effective October 13, 2021toDecember 7, 2021Table of ContentsWorldcoin Privacy Statement v2.3Last updated: 13 October 2021Thank you for choosing to be part of the Worldcoin Community!At Worldcoin (“Worldcoin,” “us,” or “we”), we recognize that your privacy is important. This Privacy Statement applies to all information we collect from you (your “Data”) through your use of and access to our websites and applications we control, your Worldcoin user account (your “Account”), the Worldcoin protocol (the “Protocol”) and all of the associated functionality, content, applications, and services we provide to you (collectively, the "Services").
We are committed to protecting your Data and your right to privacy, and we expressly designed the Services with your privacy in mind. By accessing and using the Services, you signify acceptance of the terms of this Privacy Statement. Where we require your consent to process your Data, we will ask for your consent to the collection, use, and disclosure of your Data as described further below. If you do not agree to the terms of our Privacy Statement, you may not access or use our Services. All capitalized terms not defined in this Privacy Statement have the meaning set forth in the Worldcoin User Agreement.
If you have any questions or concerns about how we use your Data, you may submit your request through our Request Portal or atprivacy@worldcoin.org.
Data You Provide To UsTo establish an Account or gain access to our Services, we will ask you to provide us with some information about you. Please note that we may not be able to serve you as effectively or offer you our Services if you choose not to share certain information with us. We may collect the following types of Data from you:We may also use the information above to provide transaction features within our Services, including finding other users and facilitating transactions with other users, including through imported contacts.
If you elect to import your device’s address book contacts to find out which of your contacts uses our Services or invite them to join you in using our Services, we will periodically sync your contacts’ information, including phone number and email, to our servers. You are responsible for ensuring your collection and sharing with us of your contacts’ information is compliant with applicable laws. This may require you to obtain your contacts’ permission. We may also get information about you from other users importing or entering their contacts. We use and may store this contact information to help you and your contacts connect through our Services. You can change your mind and turn off our access to your contacts at any time in your device settings.
WITH YOUR EXPLICIT WRITTEN CONSENT, WE MAY ALSO COLLECT IMAGES OF YOUR IRIS AND YOUR FACE. SOME JURISDICTIONS CONSIDER THESE IMAGES AS A TYPE OF BIOMETRIC DATA SUBJECT TO SPECIAL PROTECTION UNDER THE LAW. WE COLLECT THE BIOMETRIC DATA FOR THE PURPOSE OF UNIQUELY IDENTIFYING A NATURAL PERSON. IN ORDER FOR WORLDCOIN TO USE YOUR BIOMETRIC DATA, YOU WILL NEED TO FIRST SIGN A CONSENT FORM AUTHORIZING WORLDCOIN TO USE THIS DATA.
Data We Collect From Third-Party SourcesFrom time to time, we may obtain information about you from the following third-party sources:Data We Collect About You AutomaticallyTo the extent permitted under applicable Law, we may collect certain types of Data automatically, such as whenever you interact with or use our Services. This information helps us address customer support issues, improve the performance of the Services, provide you with a streamlined and personalized experience, and to help you secure your Account credentials. Information collected automatically includes:Similarly, the Worldcoin mobile application gathers information for troubleshooting and improvement. We use third party services, such as Segment.io, to view aggregated information about end user usage and interactions. Where possible, we take steps to minimize or mask the information sent to third parties (such as encoding the data).
Anonymized and Aggregated DataAnonymization is a data processing technique that modifies personal data so that it cannot be associated with a specific individual. Except as described in this section, none of the other provisions of this Privacy Statement applies to anonymized or aggregated customer data (i.e. information about individuals that we combine together so that it no longer identifies or references an individual).
We may use anonymized or aggregate data for any business purpose, including to better understand user needs and behaviors, improve our Services, conduct business intelligence and marketing, detect security threats, and train our algorithms and models. We or our third-party advertising partners may also collect certain anonymous or aggregate information. For example, we may use your IP address to diagnose problems with our servers, software, and to gather demographic information. Our third-party advertising partners may also provide us with aggregate, but not individual, reports that will tell us how many ads were presented and clicked upon on our Services.
Types of data we may anonymize include, transaction data, click-stream data, performance metrics, fraud indicators, and hashed iris scans.
We will use certain forms of Data to enhance the operation of our websites, improve our internal marketing and promotional efforts, statistically analyze Website use, to improve the Services, for research and development purposes, and to train our algorithms and models. We use the blockchain network address associated with your account to send you Worldcoins (“WLD”) or other Supported Currencies. We use your Data to deliver information to you and to send you Notices. We use your IP address to block individuals from prohibited states or countries from accessing the Services and to comply with applicable Law. Finally, we may use your Data to resolve disputes, troubleshoot technical problems and enforce our agreements with you, including the Worldcoin User Agreement and this Privacy Statement.
When you sign-up to receive WLD, you will be asked to provide biometric data in the form of a scan of your irises using the Orb. The Orb software will capture and transmit your biometric data to our servers. The Worldcoin Protocol will create a cryptographic hash of your biometric data, compare the hash to other biometric data hashes, and store the hashed version in the Worldcoin database. After we have concluded the purposes for which we collected your biometric data, we will delete your biometric data from our servers. We will keep a copy of the hashed version of your biometric data on our servers to prevent you from using an Orb to obtain more free WLD in the future.
Our primary purpose in collecting your biometric data is to successfully complete an equitable distribution of WLD by ensuring that every living individual in the world will only ever have one opportunity to claim the same amount of WLD in their lifetime. In order to be able to prevent individuals from claiming their WLD multiple times, we need to be able to uniquely identify individuals who have already claimed WLD from the Worldcoin Protocol without jeopardizing your privacy or invading the privacy of others. With your explicit written consent, we collect scans of your irises, make a cryptographic hash of the scan, and compare the cryptographic hash to the other hashes in the Worldcoin database to determine whether you have already claimed your WLD, and to train our algorithms and models for research and development purposes.
When you provide us with biometric data, you agree that you have voluntarily provided such Data, and you consent for us to use that information for the purposes for which it was collected.
Worldcoin does not disclose Data to any third parties, except to those who require access to the Data in order to perform their tasks and duties, and to share with third parties who have a legitimate purpose for accessing it.
We do not sell, license, lease or otherwise disclose your Data to any third party for any reason other than the purposes described below:Transaction information related to your use of your Account and the Services may be recorded on a public blockchain. Public blockchains are distributed ledgers, intended to immutably record transactions across wide networks of computer systems. Many blockchains are open to forensic analysis, which can lead to de-anonymization and the unintentional revelation of private financial information, especially when blockchain data is combined with other Data. It may therefore be possible for others to identify Data from (and including) wallet addresses (including your Worldcoin wallet address) and other data available on the blockchain that supports the Worldcoin Protocol, without the involvement of Worldcoin, as the blockchain is by nature a transparent and public ledger.
We use cookies to help our Services work better. In addition to cookies, we may use other similar technologies, like web beacons to track users of our Services. Web beacons, or "clear gifs," are tiny graphics with a unique identifier, similar in function to cookies. They are used to track the online movements of web users.
In contrast to cookies, which are stored on a user's computer hard drive or device, clear gifs are embedded invisibly on web pages and are about the size of the period at the end of this sentence. We and our third-party service provider employ web beacons for the reasons stated below, but primarily to help us better manage content on our Services by informing us which content is effective.
We may also use so-called "Flash Cookies" (also known as "Local Shared Objects or "LSOs") to collect and store information about your use of our services, fraud prevention and for other site operations.
These tools allow us to:• Perform website analytics• Prevent fraud and prevent attacks against our websites and Services• Advertise our Services, and additional products and services from our third-party partnersWe use cookies and trackers to assign you a unique identifier so we can record:• Websites you visit• Duration of your visit, including the amount of time an advertisement or webpage was visible• Your IP AddressYou can block cookies at any time using your web browser settings, but doing so may limit your browsing experience and your ability to use certain features of the Services. We do not currently respond to “Do Not Track” or DNT browser signals or any other mechanism that automatically communicates your choice not to be tracked online.
We use the following types of cookies:Strictly Necessary CookiesThese cookies are necessary for the Services to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in, or filling in forms. These also include cookies we may rely on for fraud prevention. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some of the Services may not work.
Performance/Analytics CookiesThese cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our Services. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the Services. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have used our Services, and will not be able to monitor its performance.
Functionality CookiesThese cookies allow us to remember the choices you make and to tailor our Services so we can provide relevant content to you. For example, a functionality cookie can remember your preferences (e.g., country or language selection), or your username.
Targeting/Advertising CookiesWorldCoin uses third-party service providers to display advertising on our Services and serve advertising on other third-party sites that may be relevant to you or your interests. These cookies are also used to help measure the effectiveness of the advertising campaign. They remember that you have visited a website and this information may be shared with other organizations, such as advertisers. This means that after you have been to our websites, you may see some advertisements about our Services elsewhere on the Internet. The information collected through this process by the third-party service providers does not enable us or them to identify your name, contact details or other personal information that directly identifies you unless you choose to provide these. Such advertising will only be delivered where permitted by applicable law. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less advertising tailored to your inferred interests on our Sites and will not receive targeted WorldCoin advertisements on third-party websites.
Worldcoin also uses Google Analytics. The following link explains how Google uses Data when you use its partners’ websites and applications: https://www.google.com/policies/privacy/partners/. Your use of the Services is evidence of your consent to Worldcoin storing and accessing cookies and other Data on your computer or mobile device= and Worldcoin’s use of Google Analytics in connection with such activities. Please read the information at the link provided so you understand what you are consenting to.
Worldcoin strives to ensure that our systems are secure and that they meet industry standards. We seek to protect Data that is provided to Worldcoin by third parties and by you by implementing physical and electronic safeguards. Worldcoin endeavors to engage third-party service providers that have security and confidentiality policies, if such third-party service providers have access to our customer’s Data.
Despite our efforts to protect the security of your information, no security system is completely effective and we cannot guarantee that our systems will be secure from unauthorized access.
We will retain your Data as long as you continue to use the Services, or for as long as is necessary to fulfill the purposes outlined in this Privacy Statement. Even after you or we delete your Account, we can retain copies of your Data for a period of time that is consistent with applicable Law, applicable statutes of limitation or as we believe is reasonably necessary to comply with applicable Law, legal processes or governmental request, to collect fees owed, to resolve Disputes, to address problems with our Services, to assist with investigations, to enforce the Worldcoin User Agreement or other applicable agreements or policies, or to take any other actions consistent with applicable Law.
WE WILL PERMANENTLY DELETE YOUR BIOMETRIC DATA IMMEDIATELY AFTER WE CONCLUDE THE PURPOSE FOR WHICH IT WAS COLLECTED. WE WILL RETAIN HASHED BIOMETRIC DATA FOR AS LONG AS IS NECESSARY TO FULFILL THE PURPOSES OUTLINED IN THIS PRIVACY STATEMENT.
Please note that blockchains are decentralized or third-party networks that are not controlled or operated by Worldcoin. Due to the public and immutable nature of blockchain technology, we cannot amend, erase, or control the disclosure of such Data to or from such networks.
Our legal basis for collecting and using the Data described above will depend on the Data concerned and the specific context in which we collect it.
In some cases, we may also have a legal obligation to collect Data from you or we may otherwise need the Data to protect your vital interests or those of another person.
If we ask you to provide Data to comply with a legal requirement or to perform a contract with you, we will make this clear at the relevant time and advise you whether the provision of your Data is mandatory or not (as well as of the possible consequences if you do not provide your Data).
Individuals under the age of 16 are not allowed to use the Services, and we do not knowingly collect Data from Children in violation of the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act. If you believe that your child under 13 has gained access to the Services without your permission, you may request the deletion of their Data by contacting us at privacy@worldcoin.org.
If we learn that we have collected Data about a child under age 13, we will delete that Data as quickly as possible. We have taken commercially reasonable steps to restrict use of the Services to those who are at least 16 years old. We do not market products or services for purchase by Children.
To facilitate our global operations, Worldcoin may transfer, store, and process your Data within our family of companies, partners, and service providers based throughout the world. We contractually obligate recipients of your Data to agree to at least the same level of privacy safeguards as required under applicable data protection laws. By communicating electronically with Worldcoin, you acknowledge and agree to your Data being processed in this way.
We may transfer Data to countries other than the country in which the Data was originally collected. These countries may not have the same data protection laws as the country in which you initially provided the Data. When we transfer your Data to other countries, we take measures to comply with applicable data protection laws related to such transfer. To the extent that we transfer your Data outside of the EEA and United Kingdom, we will ensure that the transfer is lawful and that Data Processors in third countries are obliged to comply with the GDPR and the UK Data Protection Act 2018. If transfers of Data are processed in the U.S., we may in some cases rely on applicable standard contractual clauses.
Worldcoin reserves the right to make changes to this Privacy Statement. You should review our Privacy Statement frequently. If we make material changes to our Privacy Statement, our revised Privacy Statement will be posted at getworldcoin.com/privacy, and it will either be noted in your Account or on our Website that material changes have been made, or we will notify you by email. The date of the most recent update to our Privacy Statement will be set forth in the header to the Privacy Statement.
If you have questions or concerns regarding this Privacy Statement, wish to exercise your rights, or to contact our Data Privacy Officer, please submit your request through our Request Portal or atprivacy@worldcoin.org. We respond to all requests we receive from individuals wishing to exercise their data protection rights in accordance with applicable data protection laws.
If you have an unresolved privacy or data use concern that we have not addressed satisfactorily, please contact the data protection regulator in your jurisdiction. You can find your data protection regulatorhere.
Effective September 28, 2021toOctober 13, 2021Table of ContentsWorldcoin Privacy Statement v2.1Last updated: 9 September 2021Thank you for choosing to be part of the Worldcoin Community!At Worldcoin (“Worldcoin,” “us,” or “we”), we recognize that your privacy is important. This Privacy Statement applies to all information we collect from you (your “Data”) through your use of and access to our websites and applications we control, your Worldcoin user account (your “Account”), the Worldcoin protocol (the “Protocol”) and all of the associated functionality, content, applications, and services we provide to you (collectively, the "Services").
We are committed to protecting your Data and your right to privacy, and we expressly designed the Services with your privacy in mind. By accessing and using the Services, you signify acceptance of the terms of this Privacy Statement. Where we require your consent to process your Data, we will ask for your consent to the collection, use, and disclosure of your Data as described further below. If you do not agree to the terms of our Privacy Statement, you may not access or use our Services. All capitalized terms not defined in this Privacy Statement have the meaning set forth in the Worldcoin User Agreement.
If you have any questions or concerns about how we use your Data, you may submit your request through our Request Portal or atprivacy@worldcoin.org.
Data You Provide To UsTo establish an Account or gain access to our Services, we will ask you to provide us with some information about you. Please note that we may not be able to serve you as effectively or offer you our Services if you choose not to share certain information with us. We may collect the following types of Data from you:WITH YOUR EXPLICIT WRITTEN CONSENT, WE MAY ALSO COLLECT IMAGES OF YOUR IRIS AND YOUR FACE. SOME JURISDICTIONS CONSIDER THESE IMAGES AS A TYPE OF BIOMETRIC DATA SUBJECT TO SPECIAL PROTECTION UNDER THE LAW. WE COLLECT THE BIOMETRIC DATA FOR THE PURPOSE OF UNIQUELY IDENTIFYING A NATURAL PERSON. IN ORDER FOR WORLDCOIN TO USE YOUR BIOMETRIC DATA, YOU WILL NEED TO FIRST SIGN A CONSENT FORM AUTHORIZING WORLDCOIN TO USE THIS DATA.
Data We Collect From Third-Party SourcesFrom time to time, we may obtain information about you from the following third-party sources:Data We Collect About You AutomaticallyTo the extent permitted under applicable Law, we may collect certain types of Data automatically, such as whenever you interact with or use our Services. This information helps us address customer support issues, improve the performance of the Services, provide you with a streamlined and personalized experience, and to help you secure your Account credentials. Information collected automatically includes:Anonymized and Aggregated DataAnonymization is a data processing technique that modifies personal data so that it cannot be associated with a specific individual. Except as described in this section, none of the other provisions of this Privacy Statement applies to anonymized or aggregated customer data (i.e. information about individuals that we combine together so that it no longer identifies or references an individual).
We may use anonymized or aggregate data for any business purpose, including to better understand user needs and behaviors, improve our Services, conduct business intelligence and marketing, detect security threats, and train our algorithms and models. We or our third-party advertising partners may also collect certain anonymous or aggregate information. For example, we may use your IP address to diagnose problems with our servers, software, and to gather demographic information. Our third-party advertising partners may also provide us with aggregate, but not individual, reports that will tell us how many ads were presented and clicked upon on our Services.
Types of data we may anonymize include, transaction data, click-stream data, performance metrics, fraud indicators, and hashed iris scans.
We will use certain forms of Data to enhance the operation of our websites, improve our internal marketing and promotional efforts, statistically analyze Website use, to improve the Services, for research and development purposes, and to train our algorithms and models. We use the blockchain network address associated with your account to send you Worldcoins (“WLD”) or other Supported Currencies. We use your Data to deliver information to you and to send you Notices. We use your IP address to block individuals from prohibited states or countries from accessing the Services and to comply with applicable Law. Finally, we may use your Data to resolve disputes, troubleshoot technical problems and enforce our agreements with you, including the Worldcoin User Agreement and this Privacy Statement.
When you sign-up to receive WLD, you will be asked to provide biometric data in the form of a scan of your irises using the Orb. The Orb software will capture and transmit your biometric data to our servers. The Worldcoin Protocol will create a cryptographic hash of your biometric data, compare the hash to other biometric data hashes, and store the hashed version in the Worldcoin database. After we have concluded the purposes for which we collected your biometric data, we will delete your biometric data from our servers. We will keep a copy of the hashed version of your biometric data on our servers to prevent you from using an Orb to obtain more free WLD in the future.
Our primary purpose in collecting your biometric data is to successfully complete an equitable distribution of WLD by ensuring that every living individual in the world will only ever have one opportunity to claim the same amount of WLD in their lifetime. In order to be able to prevent individuals from claiming their WLD multiple times, we need to be able to uniquely identify individuals who have already claimed WLD from the Worldcoin Protocol without jeopardizing your privacy or invading the privacy of others. With your explicit written consent, we collect scans of your irises, make a cryptographic hash of the scan, and compare the cryptographic hash to the other hashes in the Worldcoin database to determine whether you have already claimed your WLD, and to train our algorithms and models for research and development purposes.
When you provide us with biometric data, you agree that you have voluntarily provided such Data, and you consent for us to use that information for the purposes for which it was collected.
Worldcoin does not disclose Data to any third parties, except to those who require access to the Data in order to perform their tasks and duties, and to share with third parties who have a legitimate purpose for accessing it.
We do not sell, license, lease or otherwise disclose your Data to any third party for any reason other than the purposes described below:Transaction information related to your use of your Account and the Services may be recorded on a public blockchain. Public blockchains are distributed ledgers, intended to immutably record transactions across wide networks of computer systems. Many blockchains are open to forensic analysis, which can lead to de-anonymization and the unintentional revelation of private financial information, especially when blockchain data is combined with other Data. It may therefore be possible for others to identify Data from (and including) wallet addresses (including your Worldcoin wallet address) and other data available on the blockchain that supports the Worldcoin Protocol, without the involvement of Worldcoin, as the blockchain is by nature a transparent and public ledger.
We use cookies to help our Services work better. In addition to cookies, we may use other similar technologies, like web beacons to track users of our Services. Web beacons, or "clear gifs," are tiny graphics with a unique identifier, similar in function to cookies. They are used to track the online movements of web users.
In contrast to cookies, which are stored on a user's computer hard drive or device, clear gifs are embedded invisibly on web pages and are about the size of the period at the end of this sentence. We and our third-party service provider employ web beacons for the reasons stated below, but primarily to help us better manage content on our Services by informing us which content is effective.
We may also use so-called "Flash Cookies" (also known as "Local Shared Objects or "LSOs") to collect and store information about your use of our services, fraud prevention and for other site operations.
These tools allow us to:• Perform website analytics• Prevent fraud and prevent attacks against our websites and Services• Advertise our Services, and additional products and services from our third-party partnersWe use cookies and trackers to assign you a unique identifier so we can record:• Websites you visit• Duration of your visit, including the amount of time an advertisement or webpage was visible• Your IP AddressYou can block cookies at any time using your web browser settings, but doing so may limit your browsing experience and your ability to use certain features of the Services. We do not currently respond to “Do Not Track” or DNT browser signals or any other mechanism that automatically communicates your choice not to be tracked online.
We use the following types of cookies:Strictly Necessary CookiesThese cookies are necessary for the Services to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in, or filling in forms. These also include cookies we may rely on for fraud prevention. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some of the Services may not work.
Performance/Analytics CookiesThese cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our Services. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the Services. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have used our Services, and will not be able to monitor its performance.
Functionality CookiesThese cookies allow us to remember the choices you make and to tailor our Services so we can provide relevant content to you. For example, a functionality cookie can remember your preferences (e.g., country or language selection), or your username.
Targeting/Advertising CookiesWorldCoin uses third-party service providers to display advertising on our Services and serve advertising on other third-party sites that may be relevant to you or your interests. These cookies are also used to help measure the effectiveness of the advertising campaign. They remember that you have visited a website and this information may be shared with other organizations, such as advertisers. This means that after you have been to our websites, you may see some advertisements about our Services elsewhere on the Internet. The information collected through this process by the third-party service providers does not enable us or them to identify your name, contact details or other personal information that directly identifies you unless you choose to provide these. Such advertising will only be delivered where permitted by applicable law. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less advertising tailored to your inferred interests on our Sites and will not receive targeted WorldCoin advertisements on third-party websites.
Worldcoin also uses Google Analytics. The following link explains how Google uses Data when you use its partners’ websites and applications: https://www.google.com/policies/privacy/partners/. Your use of the Services is evidence of your consent to Worldcoin storing and accessing cookies and other Data on your computer or mobile device= and Worldcoin’s use of Google Analytics in connection with such activities. Please read the information at the link provided so you understand what you are consenting to.
Worldcoin strives to ensure that our systems are secure and that they meet industry standards. We seek to protect Data that is provided to Worldcoin by third parties and by you by implementing physical and electronic safeguards. Worldcoin endeavors to engage third-party service providers that have security and confidentiality policies, if such third-party service providers have access to our customer’s Data.
Despite our efforts to protect the security of your information, no security system is completely effective and we cannot guarantee that our systems will be secure from unauthorized access.
We will retain your Data as long as you continue to use the Services, or for as long as is necessary to fulfill the purposes outlined in this Privacy Statement. Even after you or we delete your Account, we can retain copies of your Data for a period of time that is consistent with applicable Law, applicable statutes of limitation or as we believe is reasonably necessary to comply with applicable Law, legal processes or governmental request, to collect fees owed, to resolve Disputes, to address problems with our Services, to assist with investigations, to enforce the Worldcoin User Agreement or other applicable agreements or policies, or to take any other actions consistent with applicable Law.
WE WILL PERMANENTLY DELETE YOUR BIOMETRIC DATA IMMEDIATELY AFTER WE CONCLUDE THE PURPOSE FOR WHICH IT WAS COLLECTED. WE WILL RETAIN HASHED BIOMETRIC DATA FOR AS LONG AS IS NECESSARY TO FULFILL THE PURPOSES OUTLINED IN THIS Privacy Statement.
Please note that blockchains are decentralized or third-party networks that are not controlled or operated by Worldcoin. Due to the public and immutable nature of blockchain technology, we cannot amend, erase, or control the disclosure of such Data to or from such networks.
Our legal basis for collecting and using the Data described above will depend on the Data concerned and the specific context in which we collect it.
In some cases, we may also have a legal obligation to collect Data from you or we may otherwise need the Data to protect your vital interests or those of another person.
If we ask you to provide Data to comply with a legal requirement or to perform a contract with you, we will make this clear at the relevant time and advise you whether the provision of your Data is mandatory or not (as well as of the possible consequences if you do not provide your Data).
Individuals under the age of 16 are not allowed to use the Services, and we do not knowingly collect Data from Children in violation of the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act. If you believe that your child under 13 has gained access to the Services without your permission, you may request the deletion of their Data by contacting us at privacy@worldcoin.org.
If we learn that we have collected Data about a child under age 13, we will delete that Data as quickly as possible. We have taken commercially reasonable steps to restrict use of the Services to those who are at least 16 years old. We do not market products or services for purchase by Children.
To facilitate our global operations, Worldcoin may transfer, store, and process your Data within our family of companies, partners, and service providers based throughout the world. We contractually obligate recipients of your Data to agree to at least the same level of privacy safeguards as required under applicable data protection laws. By communicating electronically with Worldcoin, you acknowledge and agree to your Data being processed in this way.
We may transfer Data to countries other than the country in which the Data was originally collected. These countries may not have the same data protection laws as the country in which you initially provided the Data. When we transfer your Data to other countries, we take measures to comply with applicable data protection laws related to such transfer. To the extent that we transfer your Data outside of the EEA and United Kingdom, we will ensure that the transfer is lawful and that Data Processors in third countries are obliged to comply with the GDPR and the UK Data Protection Act 2018. If transfers of Data are processed in the U.S., we may in some cases rely on applicable standard contractual clauses.
Worldcoin reserves the right to make changes to this Privacy Statement. You should review our Privacy Statement frequently. If we make material changes to our Privacy Statement, our revised Privacy Statement will be posted at getworldcoin.com/privacy, and it will either be noted in your Account or on our Website that material changes have been made, or we will notify you by email. The date of the most recent update to our Privacy Statement will be set forth in the header to the Privacy Statement.
If you have questions or concerns regarding this Privacy Statement, wish to exercise your rights, or to contact our Data Privacy Officer, please submit your request through our Request Portal or atprivacy@worldcoin.org. We respond to all requests we receive from individuals wishing to exercise their data protection rights in accordance with applicable data protection laws.
If you have an unresolved privacy or data use concern that we have not addressed satisfactorily, please contact the data protection regulator in your jurisdiction. You can find your data protection regulatorhere.
Legal Center powered by Ironclad ClickwrapCopyright © 2022,Worldcoin
