old id = 1694
Jobs – NYU Center for Data Science
1019
https://cds.nyu.edu/jobs

NYU Center for Data ScienceHarnessing Data’s Potential for the WorldJobsBelow you will find a list of the current open positions atThe NYU Center for Data Science (CDS). Please be sure to check back frequently for updates.
Faculty PositionsAI Initiative Faculty PositionAs a part of its Artificial Intelligence Initiative, New York University invites candidates to apply for tenure-track positions in AI. Applications can be submitted through theAI Initiative position Interfolio application page. The search is conducted jointly bythe NYU Courant Computer Science department,the NYU Center for Data Science,the NYU Tandon School of Engineering, andthe NYU Tandon Electrical and Computer Engineering; the faculty appointments can be in any of the four units, or joint.
We are looking for strong candidates working in a broad set of areas of AI, including, but not limited to, machine learning, natural language processing, computer vision, robotics, AI for health. Competitive salaries and startup packages will be offered. New appointees are expected to be outstanding scholars and to participate in teaching at all levels from undergraduate to doctoral. NYU offers an outstanding scholarly environment, with a large and rapidly expanding group of faculty working in AI.
Collaborative research with industry is facilitated by geographic proximity to AI research labs at Facebook, Google, DeepMind, Amazon, Microsoft Research, IBM, Bell Labs, AT&T Research, Flatiron Institute, and many companies and non-profits involved in AI research and applications.
For candidates interested in AI for health, ample opportunities exist to develop collaborative and translational research projects withNYU Langone Medical Center,the Grossman School of Medicine, andthe College of Dentistry, and other top-notch medical institutions in the New York area.
NYU belongs to the Higher Education Recruitment Consortium (HERC), which assists with dual-career searches, and our faculty are supported by a range of work-life balance programs provided by theNYU Office of Work Life.
For full consideration, please apply by December 1, 2021, though we will continue to review applications past that date as needed.
NYU is strongly committed to fostering a diverse, inclusive, and welcoming environment. Applications by members of all underrepresented groups are strongly encouraged.
QualificationsA PhD in Computer Science, Electrical and Computer Engineering, or a related field is required.
Application InstructionsThe following materials will be required as part of your application:We encourage applicants to include an optional statement of experience with or knowledge of inclusion, diversity, equity, and belonging efforts and your plans for incorporating them into your teaching, research, mentoring, and service.
Please submit your application via theAI Initiative position Interfolio application page.
EQUAL OPPORTUNITYFor people in the EU, click here for information on your privacy rights under theNYU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) page.
We strongly encourage applications from women, racial and ethnic minorities, and other individuals who are under-represented in the profession, across color, creed, race, ethnic and national origin, physical ability, gender and sexual identity, or any other legally protected basis. NYU affirms the value of differing perspectives on the world as we strive to build the strongest possible university with the widest reach. New York University is situated in Greenwich Village, one of the most vibrant and family-friendly neighborhoods in the City of New York.
SUSTAINABILITY STATEMENTNYU aims to be among the greenest urban campuses in the country and carbon neutral by 2040. Learn more by visiting theNYU Sustainability page.
Clinical Faculty PositionThe NYU Center for Data Science (CDS) seeks to fill a Clinical Faculty position in Data Science at its Washington Square campus. While we aim for a start date of Fall 2023, applications will be accepted even at a later date until positions are filled.
DescriptionCDS is the focal point for NYU’s university-wide initiative in data science and statistics, established 8 years ago, and one of the country’s leading data science research and training facilities. CDS is a vibrant space with 18 jointly appointed faculty (growing to over 20 in the next two years) and 11 associated faculty across computer science, mathematics, engineering, neuroscience, linguistics, politics, psychology, physics, biology and business; a list of affiliate faculty spanning a wide range of NYU’s schools and departments, a highly successful Master’s program and one of the first Data Science PhD programs as well as the new undergraduate program in data science. CDS’ research focuses on tools and methods at the intersection between applied mathematics, data science, high-dimensional statistics, machine learning, optimization, and several data-driven application areas.
The primary responsibilities will be:This Clinical Faculty position is not a tenured or tenured-track position. The initial appointment is typically for one (1) year with potential for three-year renewals.
QualificationsApplicants must have a strong background in Data Science and a Ph.D. in a related field, as well as experience in and knowledge about undergraduate and graduate teaching, learning, and curricular issues.
Applications instructionsPlease provide in your application:Applications received through theClinical Faculty of Data Science Interfolio application pagewill be given full consideration.
Equal Employment Opportunity StatementFor people in the EU, click here for information on your privacy rights under theNYU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) page.
NYU is an Equal Opportunity Employer and is committed to a policy of equal treatment and opportunity in every aspect of its recruitment and hiring process without regard to age, alienage, caregiver status, childbirth, citizenship status, color, creed, disability, domestic violence victim status, ethnicity, familial status, gender and/or gender identity or expression, marital status, military status, national origin, parental status, partnership status, predisposing genetic characteristics, pregnancy, race, religion, reproductive health decision making, sex, sexual orientation, unemployment status, veteran status, or any other legally protected basis. Women, racial and ethnic minorities, persons of minority sexual orientation or gender identity, individuals with disabilities, and veterans are encouraged to apply for vacant positions at all levels.
Sustainability StatementNYU aims to be among the greenest urban campuses in the country and carbon neutral by 2040. Learn more by visiting theNYU Sustainability page.
Adjunct Faculty Position (AY22-23 Spring 2023 DS-GA 1019 Advanced Python for Data Science)The NYU Center for Data Science (CDS) seeks to fill an Adjunct Faculty position in Data Science at its Washington Square campus. Applications can be submitted through theAdjunct Faculty Interfolio application page.
The position is for one (1) semester in Spring 2023to teach DS-GA 1019 Advanced Python for Data Science from January 23, 2023 through May 17, 2023.
QualificationsPh.D. in data science or a related field.
Application InstructionsThe following materials will be required as part of your application:Please submit your application via theAdjunct Faculty Interfolio application page.
EQUAL OPPORTUNITYFor people in the EU, click here for information on your privacy rights under theNYU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) page.
We strongly encourage applications from women, racial and ethnic minorities, and other individuals who are under-represented in the profession, across color, creed, race, ethnic and national origin, physical ability, gender and sexual identity, or any other legally protected basis. NYU affirms the value of differing perspectives on the world as we strive to build the strongest possible university with the widest reach. New York University is situated in Greenwich Village, one of the most vibrant and family-friendly neighborhoods in the City of New York.
SUSTAINABILITY STATEMENTNYU aims to be among the greenest urban campuses in the country and carbon neutral by 2040. Learn more by visiting theNYU Sustainability page.
For questions, please contact Remi Moss, Director of Administration and Operations atremimoss@nyu.edu.
©2022 NYU CDS 7th floor, 60 5th Ave, New York, NY, 10011NYU Center for Data Science
